Pictured Cliffs progradational shoreface sandstones interfinger with and grade distally into offshore marine strata of the Lewis Shale (figure 2C), but the gas produced from Pictured Cliffs reservoirs geochemically appears to have been sourced primarily from coals of the Fruitland Formation (J.R. Hatch, USGS, written commun., 2003).
Based on the gas production that could be assigned to Lewis Shale source rocks and reservoirs, the Lewis Shale TPS boundary was drawn to include the subsurface and outcrop extent of the Lewis Shale and the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone (figure 3A).
The TPS boundary does not include small isolated outcrops of any of these units outside the main contiguous outcrop belt.
The boundary extends to the southwest and to the northeast a short distance into the outcrop belt of the Menefee Formation because the well-log cross section indicates that several of the shoreface sandstones of the La Ventana Tongue may extend into the main body of the Menefee.
The TPS boundary was drawn to include any of these minor sandstones or associated fluvial sandstones in the Menefee that might have been charged with gas from the Lewis Shale.
The Lewis Shale TPS has been interpreted as a continuous gas accumulation (Masters, 1979).
The Lewis Shale is thought to be the source rock for the continuous gas accumulation based on modest levels of total organic carbon (TOC) and as much as 2,400 ft of formation thickness (Mavor and others, 2003).
Reservoirs are thin sandstones and siltstones within the Lewis Shale itself and sandstones and siltstones of the adjacent La Ventana and Chacra Tongues, producing from natural and artificially stimulated fractures and charged from the Lewis Shale.
EUR curves from La Ventana and Chacra wells are similar to EUR curves from other continuous gas reservoirs in that they show declining water and gas production curves (Troy Cook, USGS, oral commun., 2000).
There are only minor associated liquid hydrocarbons in the TPS in the form of condensate produced with the gas.
Solid bitumen has been observed in sandstone pores and fractures (Parris and others, 2002).
These two observations are evidence for present and past liquid hydrocarbons in the Lewis Shale despite very low oil yields from Lewis reservoirs (Parris and others, 2003; Fishman and others, 2004).
The La Ventana and Chacra Tongues and their distal equivalents in the Lewis Shale are typical of low-porosity and low-permeability “tight” gas sandstones.
Presumably, in more proximal settings, the La Ventana and Chacra sandstones have slightly greater porosity and permeability resulting from deposition in slightly higher energy shoreface depositional environments.
A map plot of water production from wells in the La Ventana and Chacra shows increased water production to the southwest with the highest water production at the up-dip southwest margin of the gas-producing trend (IHS, 2000a,b).
The marine Lewis is transitional in lithology from the proximal shoreface sandstones and siltstones of the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues to more distal thin-bedded marine siltstones, shales, and mudstones in the central part of the SJB.
Gas production in the Lewis Shale is from natural fractures and fracture-stimulated clastic-rich zones in the primarily mudstone-dominated parts of the wells (Frantz and others 1999; Dube and others, 2000).
These clastic-rich zones contain numerous interbeds of brittle siltstones and thin sandstones that are susceptible to fracturing (Jennings and others, 1997a; Mavor and others, 2003).
The organic-carbon-rich marine rocks of the Lewis Shale (figures 2C and 3A–D) are thought to be the source for the continuous gas accumulation in the Lewis Shale TPS; however, there is little definitive data in the published literature on Lewis gas analyses or composition.
The Lewis Shale is as much as 2,400 ft thick (figure 3B); the thickest section being in the deepest northeastern part of the structural basin.
This increased thickness is due both to greater accommodation space in the original depositional basin in that area and to facies changes because to the southwest, shoreface strata are assigned to the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues and the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone.
Structure contours on the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed (figure 3C) within the Lewis Shale depict both the present structure in the Lewis and the general structure of the San Juan Basin.
Rocks dip to the northeast on the Chaco slope in the southwestern part of the basin, and they dip less steeply into the central part of the San Juan Basin (figure 3C).
In the structurally deeper distal part of the basin, essentially flatlying Lewis Shale near the SJB axis is disrupted by a small anticline (figure 3C).
North of that, two small synclines displace the Lewis Shale to its greatest depth in the basin.
The beds dip steeply up to the outcrop on the northeast margin of the basin.
The depositional environment of the Lewis Shale in part dictated its role as a hydrocarbon source rock in the SJB.
The Lewis Shale was deposited under marine conditions during both the early Campanian relative sealevel rise and the subsequent relative sealevel fall in the latter part of the Campanian.
The Lewis Shale is predominantly sandy siltstone and silty to sandy mudstone, with minor thin sandstones and organic-carbon-rich shale, all of which interfinger and grade to the southwest into the fine- to coarse-grained sandstones and siltstones of the basal Cliff House, La Ventana and Chacra Tongues, and the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone.
All of these marginal-marine and shoreface clastics were supplied by depositional systems prograding into the SJB from the southwest.
The Lewis Shale was deposited primarily in offshore marine settings, with clastic material derived from the fluvial and deltaic systems to the southwest.
These deltas supplied terrestrial organic carbon (type-III kerogen) to the Lewis depositional basin in addition to the clastic material.
Marine organisms living in the water column in the Cretaceous Western Interior Sea provided typeII kerogen to the Lewis Shale.
Below the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed, the lower part of the Lewis Shale that was deposited under an overall marine transgression would be expected to have a predominance of marine organic matter (type-II kerogen) because clastics were being preferentially deposited in more proximal nearshore settings.
In contrast, the upper part of the Lewis Shale above the Huerfanito was deposited under regressive marine conditions with progradation of nearshore and continental systems that would have deposited a proportionally larger component of terrestrial organic matter (type-III kerogen) mixed with marine organic matter and a relatively higher component of clastic material.
Similar relations have been documented by at least one other detailed study between transgressive and regressive shales above and below the Tocito Sandstone Lentil within the Mancos Shale of the San Juan Basin (Pasley and others, 1993).
In those units, the distribution of petroleum source rocks was based on analysis of the architecture of the depositional sequence.
For the Mancos Shale, the transgressive shale above the Tocito Sandstone Lentil contained predominantly marine organic matter, whereas the shale below the Tocito contained a larger proportion of terrestrial organic material (Pasley and others, 1993).
This relation documents the variable distribution of marine dominated organic material in transgressive shales versus the abundance of terrestrial organic matter in regressive marine shales that is predicted from sequence stratigraphic concepts.
The sequence stratigraphic analysis and the recognition of the third-order maximum flooding surfaces in the Lewis Shale TPS allow similar predictions for the richest organic source beds within the Lewis Shale.
These third-order marine flooding surfaces represent times of maximum transgression of the Lewis seaway, and thus, would also represent times of minimum clastic input into the deeper part of the basin, corresponding to times of potentially maximum marine organic-matter accumulation.
These marine-dominated organic-carbon-rich shale intervals at the third-order maximum marine flooding surfaces are postulated here to represent the richest source beds within the Lewis Shale.
The marine flooding surfaces that delineate the Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals in the lower part of the Lewis Shale were deposited in an overall transgressive system of the second-order TST.
Thus, they would be expected to contain a proportionally greater component of marine organic matter than the third-order maximum flooding surfaces identified in the Ute interval of the Lewis Shale.
This parallels the expectation that, in general, the Lewis Shale deposited as part of the second-order TST below the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed should contain a greater proportion of marine organic matter than the Lewis Shale that is part of the second-order HST above the Huerfanito.
The marine shales deposited adjacent to the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed correspond to both the second-order and the third-order maximum flooding surfaces, and they should contain the highest percentage of marine organic matter and represent the best hydrocarbon source rock in the Lewis Shale TPS.
This link between the maximum flooding surfaces and organic-rich shale beds has not necessarily been recognized in previous sampling of the Lewis Shale for organic-carbon analyses.
Reported geochemical analyses generally do not refer to the specific stratigraphic interval or the corresponding sequence stratigraphic unit from which the samples were collected.
Thus, previously collected samples may not represent the richest source rocks present in the Lewis.
The marine rocks of the Lewis Shale are reported to have total organic carbon (TOC) contents that range from 0.45 to 2.5 percent and average about 1.0 percent (Dube and others, 2000).
Mavor and others (2003) report TOC varies from 0.5 to 2.5 percent with an average TOC of 1.3 percent.
The hydrogen index (HI) varies from 150 to 270 mg/g, values expected to produce wet and/or dry gas (J.R. Hatch, written commun., 2002), although Mavor and others (2003) report a HI from 25 to 49 mg/g, and an OI (oxygen index) from 2 to 16 mg/g.
Organic matter was primarily marine in origin in the offshore part of the depositional basin, with a southwest-sourced terrestrial organic matter component contributed from the continental clastic-source depositional systems.
It is thus likely that the organic matter in the Lewis contains a mixture of type-II and type-III kerogen.
Based on the distribution of vitrinite reflectance values bracketing the Lewis Shale (see next section on Source Rock Maturity), its known gas production (Jennings and others, 1997; Dube and others, 2000), EUR curves for Lewis wells that respond similarly to wells in other known continuous gas fields (Troy Cook, USGS, oral commun., 2000), and recent distribution of and production from wells recompleted in the Lewis (Jennings and others, 1997; Dube and others, 2000), the Lewis Shale in this assessment is considered to host a selfsourced continuous gas accumulation, as previously indicated by Masters (1979).
Despite the fact that wells in the Lewis TPS primarily produce gas, it is apparent from petrographic studies that at least some oil probably was generated early in the maturation history of the Lewis Shale (Parris and others, 2003; Fishman and others, 2004).
The overall low organic content of the rocks based on TOC values, the mixture of type-II and type-III organic matter present, and the extent of time the rocks have been in the dry gas generation window probably limited the volume of oil generated.
There is only minimal condensate reported from Lewis production (IHS, 2000a,b).
