Approximately 15 billion bbl of oil has been produced from the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province, and about 12 billion bbl from the Prudhoe Bay oil field (figure 1; table 1; Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, 2006).
Virtually all production is from an area along the coast near the Barrow arch and centered at Prudhoe Bay (figure 3).
These accumulations are estimated to hold remaining reserves of nearly 7 billion bbl of oil and more than 35 trillion ft3 of gas (table 1; Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, 2006), including resources in undeveloped accumulations that are not typically reported as “proven reserves.”
Therefore, the reserve estimates reported herein (Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, 2006) are higher than the 4.4 billion bbl and 8.4 trillion ft3 of proven reserves of oil and gas, respectively, reported for the entire State of Alaska by the Energy Information Administration (2006a, b).
Oil (including condensate) is marketed through the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System (figure 3); however, gas cannot be marketed at present in the absence of a gas pipeline.
Most known petroleum accumulations are in structural and (or) combination structural-stratigraphic traps related to closure along the Barrow arch, which has focused hydrocarbon migration since Early Cretaceous time.
Thus, reserves are in multiple stratigraphic horizons in most oilfield units (table 2).
Since 1995, several petroleum accumulations in stratigraphic traps have been developed, including (1) incised shoreface sandstones in the Beaufortian sequence (Alpine pool in the Colville River unit and the newly announced Lookout and Spark discoveries in the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska [NPRA]); (2) turbidite sandstones in the Brookian sequence (Badami unit; Tarn and Meltwater pools in the Kuparuk River unit; Nanuq pool in the Colville River unit); and (3) fluvial-estuarine incised channel sandstones in the Brookian sequence (Tabasco pool in the Kuparuk River unit, figure 3; table 2).
Although some of these stratigraphic traps occur near the axis of the Barrow arch, most are off structure and thus provide evidence for future potential petroleum discoveries in similar stratigraphic traps.
A large oil, condensate, and natural-gas accumulation occurs in the Point Thomson field, about 80 km east of Prudhoe Bay (figure 3).
Although no production has been reported from this field, the Alaska Division of Oil and Gas (2006) has estimated reserves at 243 million bbl of liquid petroleum and 8 trillion ft3 of gas - the largest known hydrocarbon accumulation in onshore Arctic Alaska that has not yet been developed and produced.
Two new field units, the Oooguruk and Nikaitchuq, were formed in 2003 and 2004, respectively (table 2).
Wells in both units have tested positive for oil, and additional delineation drilling is ongoing.
One former unit, the Kuukpik, which was located between the Colville River and Oooguruk units (figure 3), was terminated in 2001 despite positive oil tests from multiple wells (table 2).
At least 27 oil and gas accumulations are known outside the unitized oil fields discussed in the previous subsection (figure 4; table 2).
Three gas accumulations (A–C, figure 4) have been developed for local use by the community of Barrow near the northernmost part of NPRA.
The Alaska Division of Oil and Gas (2006) has estimated that, collectively, these gas fields have produced more than 40 billion ft3 of gas and contain 34 billion ft3 of gas of proven reserves.
The remaining 24 known accumulations are undeveloped and include discoveries during the initial exploration within Naval Petroleum Reserve Number 4 (now NPRA) by the U.S. Navy in the 1940s and 1950s, such as the Umiat, Fish Creek, and Simpson oil accumulations and the Gubik, Meade, Square Lake, and Wolf Creek gas accumulations (fig 4; table 2).
Among these discoveries, the Umiat ranks as the largest oil accumulation, with an estimated 70 million bbl recoverable (Molenaar, 1982), and the Gubik as the largest gas accumulation, with an estimated 600 billion ft3 recoverable (Kumar and others, 2002).
All other petroleum accumulations are either poorly defined or considered to be subeconomic, and so no estimates of recoverable resources have been made.
The geology of many of these accumulations was summarized by Kumar and others (2002).
Industry exploration of the Brooks Range foothills (figure 1) during the 1960s and 1970s resulted in the discovery of the East Kurupa, Kavik, and Kemik gas accumulations, all poorly defined in size.
Recent estimates suggest recoverable volumes of gas ranging from 95 to 172 billion ft3 in the Kavik accumulation (Verma and others, 2006); no estimates have been made for the other accumulations.
Exploration in Federal and State offshore areas during the 1980s and 1990s resulted in the discovery of several petroleum accumulations that have not yet been developed.
Those accumulations nearest to onshore infrastructure may be the most likely targets.
The Liberty (also known as the Tern Island) accumulation, just southeast of the Duck Island unit (figures 3, 4) and estimated to contain 120 million bbl of recoverable oil, may be developable by extended-reach drilling from onshore (Petroleum News, 2006).
Accumulations in both Ellesmerian and Beaufortian reservoirs at Gwydyr Bay are estimated at 48 to 73 million bbl of recoverable oil (Thomas and others, 1993).
Other oil discoveries for which no estimates of recoverable resources are available include the Stinson, Hammerhead, and Kuvlum, all north and east of the Point Thomson unit (figures 3, 4).
The Sandpiper accumulation, just northwest of the Northstar unit (figures 3, 4), contains oil, condensate, and gas; poorly constrained estimates of 93 and 150 million bbl of recoverable oil have been reported (Thomas and others, 1993, 1996).
On the Chukchi Shelf (figure 4), the Burger gas and condensate accumulation is estimated to contain 9.5 trillion ft3 of gas and 489 million bbl of natural gas liquids (Craig and Sherwood, 2004).
These estimates are risked, mean volumes for the “most likely” trap-fill model used in the analysis.
