At that time, neither Dane nor other workers had yet correlated sandstones from their study area in the southeast around the southern part of the San Juan Basin to the type section of the Cliff House Sandstone on the northwestern flank of the SJB.
Beaumont and others (1956) abandoned Dane’s original name “Chacra” in favor of the Cliff House Sandstone during their mapping around the southern SJB.
However, they retained the name La Ventana Tongue of the Cliff House in the southeast SJB.
Apparently they thought at the time that all of the La Ventana (and Danes’s Chacra) was equivalent to the entire sec-tion of the Cliff House at the type section and on the northwest margin of the SJB.
On a subsurface cross section of well logs, Fassett (1977) relabeled the “Chacra” as the unnamed tongue, despite indicating in the text that this unit correlated on out-crop to Dane’s (1936) original “Chacra.”
He also suggested that the name Tsaya Canyon sandstone tongue of the Cliff House Sandstone be considered for the unit, but he did not formally rename it, because the publication was a guidebook.
Fassett (1977) referred to sandstones below the La Ventana as basal Cliff House Sandstone.
Fassett (1977) also indicated rea-sons against resurrecting the name Chacra, citing the recently proposed adoption of a similar name, “Chacra producing inter-val,” by the New Mexico Oil Conservation Commission.
The proposed “Chacra producing interval” would contain sand-stones within both the Chacra and La Ventana.
Additionally, Fassett (1977) indicated that some geologists working in the subsurface of the SJB had incorrectly identified the uppermost two sandstones of the La Ventana as Chacra, adding to the stratigraphic confusion.
Subsequently, Beaumont and Hoffman (1992) proposed the informal name Chacra Mesa tongue for the unit, again based on outcrops on Chacra Mesa.
This proposal introduced yet another name for the same unit originally designated by Dane (1936).
The fact that the La Ventana extends northwestward in the subsurface from outcrops near the town of La Ventana to the outcrop belt of the Cliff House south of its type section (Fassett, 1977) indicates that Dane’s (1936) original stratigraphic interpretation of the La Ventana and Chacra was probably correct.
Fassett (1977) stated that he and others had earlier suggested that Dane’s (1936) original definition be restored, as did Beaumont and Hoffman (1992).
Apparently, no outcrop studies document that the three stratigraphic subdivisions recognized within the Cliff House on the southeast margin of the SJB (basal Cliff House, La Ventana, and Chacra) can be correlated to similar subdivisions within the Cliff House on the northwest flank of the SJB.
However, well-log cross sections (Molenaar and Baird, 1992; Molenaar and others, 2002) and subsurface correlation of well logs for this assessment study enable correlation of these units.
A sequence stratigraphic study of the Cliff House Sandstone in Mancos Canyon in the northwest SJB near the type section of the Mesaverde identified complex packaging of shoreface sandbodies within the Cliff House (Olsen and others, 1999).
Further studies of this kind have the potential for elucidating more detailed relations between the internal geometry of the Cliff House at the type section and the stratigraphic units designated by Dane (1936) in the southeast SJB.
From the previously published regional well-log cross sections and those done for the present assessment study, Dane’s (1936) original interpretation of major recognizable units within the Cliff House appears correct, and these units can be recognized and correlated in the subsurface cross sections used in this assessment.
For these reasons, the present report refers to the unit in question as the Chacra Tongue of the Cliff House Sandstone to parallel Dane’s (1936) original formal designation of the La Ventana Tongue and his original interpretation and designation of the stratigraphic relations of the “Chacra.”
The Huerfanito Bentonite Bed is a laterally extensive unit within the Lewis Shale formed from altered volcanic ash that can be traced in well logs and on the outcrop throughout the San Juan Basin (figure 2A) (Fassett, 2000).
The Huerfanito Bentonite Bed extends across the deeper part of the original depositional basin and overlies the Chacra Tongue in the southwest part of the San Juan Basin (figure 2B).
The Huerfanito can be identified in well logs and used as a subsurface stratigraphic marker.
It demarcates the Lewis Shale into two parts (Fassett and Hinds, 1971; Manfrino, 1984).
The Lewis Shale has been subdivided in industry reports since the 1990s into three informal intervals, the Ute, Navajo City, and Otero intervals (figure 2B) (see for example, Bereskin, 2001a; Jennings and others, 2001).
However, the names “Navajo City Chacra interval” and “Otero Chacra interval” were used at least as early as 1983 (Meibos, 1983).
In addition, more recent studies also refer to a fourth interval within the basal part of the Lewis Shale as the upper Cliff House (Bereskin, 2001a, 2003) or the Cliff House transition interval (Jennings and others, 1997a,b; Dube and others, 2000; Molenaar and others, 2002; Mavor and others, 2003).
In this assessment report, the Lewis Shale comprises, in ascending order, the Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals below the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed and the Ute interval above the Huerfanito (figure 2B).
In basins or fields with extensive well-log control, the application of sequence stratigraphic concepts can result in a high-resolution stratigraphic framework for subsurface correlation and for analyzing reservoir, source, and seal distribution (Van Wagoner and others, 1990).
The application of sequence stratigraphic concepts and designation of sequence stratigraphic units and surfaces is particularly enlightening in terms of reservoir and source rocks.
A sequence stratigraphic interpretation of the Lewis Shale TPS allows depositional units to be evaluated in light of the processes that formed them, processes that are also germane to the designation of components of the TPS such as reservoirs and source rocks, and the processes of generation, migration, and accumulation of hydrocarbons.
The marine rocks of the Lewis Shale TPS were deposited first during the youngest major transgression of the Cretaceous sea in the early part of the Campanian (figure 2B) and subsequently during the last Cretaceous marine regression in the latter part of the Campanian (see for example, Weimer, 1960; Peterson and Kirk, 1977; Haq and others, 1988).
The Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals of the offshore Lewis Shale that were deposited during the Campanian transgression are laterally equivalent to associated marginal-marine and shoreface deposits of the basal Cliff House Sandstone and to the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone.
The Huerfanito Bentonite Bed (Fassett and Hinds, 1971) was deposited during the maximum Campanian marine transgression and represents altered volcanic ash that accumulated along the maximum flooding surface of this probable second-order sealevel cycle.
The Ute interval of the offshore Lewis Shale above the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed was deposited during the major marine regression in the latter part of the Campanian.
In this upper part of the section, the Lewis Shale grades to the southwest into progradational shoreface sandstones of the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone.
The Campanian transgression and regression within the Lewis Shale and associated shoreface sandstones likely represents a second-order relative sealevel cycle.
Well-log cross sections and correlation of ammonite-bearing zones within the Lewis Shale (Molenaar and others, 2002) indicate down-lap of strata within the Ute interval onto the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed and associated shales, both of which extend to the southwest over the Chacra Tongue.
The Huerfanito and associated marine shales represent the condensed section associated with the maximum marine flooding surface (MFS) during the Campanian (figure 2C), corresponding to the farthest southwestward transgression of the Campanian Western Interior Seaway in the SJB.
The maximum marine flooding surface separates strata of the second-order transgressive system tract (TST) below the Huerfanito and MFS, comprising the Lewis Shale, Cliff House Sandstone, and La Ventana and Chacra Tongues, from progradational strata of the highstand system tract (HST) above, including the Lewis Shale and laterally equivalent part of the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone.
Additionally, the transgressive nature of the TST in the lower part of the Lewis Shale is indicated by the back-stepping pattern of shoreface sandstones in the Cliff House transition that are successively overlain to the southwest by the La Ventana Tongue and subsequently by the Chacra Tongue (figure 2C).
A second-order sequence boundary likely exists near the top of the uppermost sandstone of the progradational Point Lookout Sandstone and within the laterally equivalent part of the Menefee Formation, but below the stratigraphically lowest sandstones of the Cliff House.
This sequence boundary is expected here because the large basinward shift in shoreface facies demonstrated by the strongly prograding Point Lookout Sandstone and the laterally equivalent continental facies of the Menefee were most likely deposited in response to a slowing of relative sealevel rise and/or lowering of sea level prior to the major transgression represented by the back-stepping pattern of the shoreface sandstones and marine rocks of the overlying Cliff House Sandstone and Lewis Shale, respectively.
The corresponding candidate for a second-order sequence boundary at the top of the Lewis Shale perhaps lies at the unconformity separating the Kirtland-Fruitland Formations (undifferentiated) from the overlying Tertiary Ojo Alamo Sandstone.
These two sequence boundaries define a second-order sequence encompassing the Lewis Shale and correlative units (Haq and others, 1988).
