The eastern part of the North American continent contains several dozen Mesozoic extensional basins that are distributed onshore from Florida northward to Nova Scotia, and offshore from the Blake Plateau to Georges Bank.
In general, the onshore basins are situated within the Precambrian to Paleozoic rocks of the Piedmont and Blue Ridge and to a much lesser extent within Paleozoic strata along the western Piedmont margin in Maryland and southern Pennsylvania.
The East Coast Mesozoic Basins Play (6901) extends from beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain in northern Florida, Alabama, and Georgia, northeastward along the Atlantic coastal margin to southern New England.
The play occurs in parts of four distinct provinces, the Piedmont, Blue Ridge, Atlantic Coastal Plain, and New England provinces, and extends eastward onto the outer continental shelf.
In general, the play is bounded, in part, by the Blue Ridge Thrust Belt and Appalachian Basin Provinces (068 and 067) on the west, and by the 3-mile limit of State waters on the east.
The East Coast Mesozoic Basins Play occupies an area of about 113,000 sq mi, approximately 900 miles long and 100–140 miles wide.
The East Coast Mesozoic Basins are assessed collectively as a single play that extends over parts of four provinces.
Schultz (1988) described the onshore basins for the previous 1989 assessment.
This present assessment is concerned with the potential undiscovered oil and gas resources of the onshore basins and of the offshore basins within the 3-mile limit.
It should be noted, however, that almost all of the offshore basins are beyond the 3-mile limit.
In general, the east coast Mesozoic basins range in size from 190 sq mi or less to 190,000 sq mi or more.
The exposed onshore basins, approximately 30 in number (Luttrell, 1989), occur chiefly within the Piedmont physiographic province generally from Virginia southward into the Carolinas.
To the north, in Maryland and Pennsylvania, Mesozoic basins interrupt the physiographic expression of the more mountainous Blue Ridge and extend northeastward into the highlands of New England.
Other basins occur widespread in the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic province, where they are buried beneath younger Mesozoic and Cenozoic strata at depths ranging from a few to several thousand feet (Benson 1992; Hanson, 1988, Milici and others, 1991).
Parts of the South Georgia Basin extend beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain into the Gulf Coastal Plain in northern Florida (Chowns, and Williams, 1983).
Similar rift-related structures occur offshore on the Continental Shelf, where they have been imaged beneath the post-rift unconformity by regional and detailed seismic surveys.
These structures include the Norfolk basin offshore of southeastern Virginia, and the Fenwick basin offshore of Delaware (for example, see Bayer, 1987 and Bayer and Milici, 1987; Benson and others, 1986, Benson, 1992).
In general, these basins formed along the continental margin in response to the regional uplift, extension, and crustal thinning that occurred during the mid-Triassic opening of the Atlantic Ocean.
The basins began to form about 227 million years ago, in middle Carnian (Late Triassic) time (Manspeizer and Cousminer, 1988) along the newly formed continental margins.
This Mesozoic rifting lasted for only a relatively short period of time and ended early in the Jurassic approximately concurrent with large-scale regional vulcanism, intrusion of diabase and extrusion of basalt.
Contemporaneous with rifting, the basins were filled with a variety of continental siliciclastics ranging from very-coarse boulder beds and arkosic sandstones along the basin margins, to red siltstones, mudstones, and very fine-grained gray and black lake deposits that were deposited in diverse fluvial-lacustrine environments within basin interiors.
In general, the basin infilling appears to have occurred in a mountainous tropical rain forest setting of considerable local relief (see Luttrell, 1989 for a summary; Cornett and Olsen, 1990).
Basins buried beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain and on the North American Continental Shelf are separated from overlying younger deposits by a pronounced unconformity, the post-rift unconformity (Schlee and Klitgord, 1986), which marks approximately 100 million years of erosion and beveling of the preexisting early Mesozoic topography prior to deposition of Cretaceous coastal plain sediments.
This unconformity is of regional extent and has been traced throughout the seismic network that covers much of the Atlantic outer continental shelf (Klitgord, 1981).
Most of the Mesozoic basins are faulted along their western margins by east-dipping faults, and their hanging walls have moved downward relatively to the east during basin extension and filling.
West-dipping faults, although not uncommon, are generally subsidiary to the eastward-dipping master set.
This extensional deformation occurred coincidentally with sedimentation and basin fill, so that the first-formed deposits were deformed progressively as the basin widened.
The extension, thus, not only enhanced the development of fracture porosity, especially in the older Mesozoic rocks, but also resulted in some folding of the strata within the basins and thereby formed structural traps; in places extensional deformation most certainly reduced the effectiveness of available seals.
Reservoirs: Potential reservoir rocks encompass a variety of lithologies that range from very coarse alluvial fan deposits, "fanglomerates," to fluvial and deltaic deposits that were deposited along basin margins and interfinger with adjacent finer-grained lake deposits.
Because of the great amount of local relief that existed in places along faulted basin margins, deposition of these coarser-grained deposits took place very rapidly so that great thicknesses of sediments accumulated with little or no chance for reworking by the agencies of wind and water.
As a result, sorting is commonly poor and the porosity between sandstone grains is commonly clogged with finer-grained siliciclastics.
In contrast, deltaic and littoral sandstones that accumulated within basin interiors may constitute some of the better reservoirs, especially where they are extensionally fractured and sealed by black shale source rocks.
Conventional core analyses from 27 sandstone samples from one well in the Richmond basin, Virginia, yield values for porosity that range from 2.0% to 12.5%, with a median value of 8.2%.
Permeability values for the same samples range from <0.01 to 18 mD, with a median of 0.61 mD.
In the Deep River basin, North Carolina, porosities are generally low and average about 3.5% (Reid and Hoffman, in preparation).
Fracture porosity may be important in some places, especially in the sedimentary strata that were deposited early in basin history.
Source rocks: The better source rocks within the Mesozoic basins are the gray and black shales that generally were deposited in lakes, offshore in deeper water environments, probably during periods of high organic productivity, and perhaps under anoxic conditions.
These black shale beds may range from a few feet to several hundred feet thick.
Kerogen in these beds generally consists of material derived from vascular plants and algae which, in source beds, are prone to yield both gas and oil.
Thermal maturation values range widely, from within the zone of dry gas to immature with respect to liquid hydrocarbons.
In the Newark and Hartford basins, thermal maturity ranges greatly over short stratigraphic distances and reflects the effects of both regional and localized high flows of heat associated with hydrothermal alteration and diabase intrusion during the final phase of basin development in the Early Jurassic (Pratt and others, 1988).
Timing and migration of hydrocarbons: A time-temperature model for the Taylorsville basin (Milici and others, 1991) indicates that the lower part of the Taylorsville basin entered the zone of oil generation about 195 Ma, in the Early Jurassic.
Depending on the depth of burial and heat flow for each of the basins, hydrocarbon generation and migration into local traps appears to have been initiated concurrently with extension and sedimentation late in the Triassic and continued into the early Jurassic, when the basin extension ceased following continental breakup, separation, and the initial opening of the Atlantic Ocean.
Traps: Potential traps within the Mesozoic rift basins are likely to occur at depths ranging from about a thousand feet to almost 20,000 feet within some of the larger basins.
They are likely to be formed from a combination of structural and stratigraphic features related to contemporaneous tectonic extension, basin deepening, and rapid sedimentation.
Deposits in the lower parts of the basins are more likely to be complexly folded and faulted than are deposits in the upper parts of basins.
Rollover anticlines are likely to occur above listric faults along basin margins, areas that are likely to exhibit rapid lateral variations of coarse-grained siliciclastic rocks in short distances.
In the Piedmont, metmorphic rocks are exposed within the perimeters of several Mesozoic basins, attesting to the complexity of local structure.
Late stage compressional structures are conspicuous features in some of the basins, to the extent that some large-scale folds exhibit a total stratigraphic thickness that exceeds present basin depths.
The compressional forces that formed these larger scale folds apparently were generated as the newly formed North American continent drifted relatively eastward, away from the region of high heat flow and mantle convection that was the driving force in the disruption of the protocontinent, Pangea.
Subsequently, as the continental margin cooled the recently uplifted and extended crust subsided and was compressed to fit into a lower, shorter geodesic arc, thus generating the compression that folded Mesozoic sediments within the basins.
Extensional faults of all dimensions occur within the basins and in some places may form updip cutoffs that place potential seals against coarser-grained siliciclastic reservoir rocks.
Where gray to black basinal shales are suitable mature and extensively fractured, they could constitute autogenic reservoirs for the production of natural gas.
Exploration status: Although almost all of the larger basins have had some drilling in them, either for coal, oil and gas, or both, only two of them have been seriously explored for oil and gas.
These are the Richmond and Taylorsville basins.
Of the two, the Richmond basin appears to have been largely explored, whereas much area in the Taylorsville basin beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain remains to be tested by the drill.
The South Georgia and associated Mesozoic basins, which lie buried beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain, extend from Alabama and Florida through Georgia to South Carolina.
They are known chiefly from several dozen wells that have penetrated the coastal plain cover.
Although there is little specific data concerning these wells, three are shown by Chowns and Williams (1983) to have penetrated the Early Mesozoic section and to have entered into Paleozoic rocks identified as part of the African craton.
Four wells drilled into the Durham basin, North Carolina, exhibit multiple shows of oil and gas at depths ranging up to about 4,600 feet (Reid and Hoffman, in preparation).
The shows are most commonly of natural gas and oil, with some of condensate or asphalt.
Reinemund (1955) reported on the results of thirty diamond drill holes that were drilled into the Deep River Coal Field in the Durham basin between 1915 and 1950.
Oil shales associated with the coal beds in these holes yield as much as 10 to 15 gallons of oil per ton and apparently could serve as source beds.
The Richmond basin, Virginia, has been drilled extensively for coal, oil, and gas.
Between 1897 and 1985, 38 exploratory holes were drilled in the basin (Wilkes, 1988).
Of the 38 holes, 22 were drilled to depths of 1,000 feet or more.
The deepest hole, Cornell Oil Company, Number 1 Bailey, entered granite basement at 7110 feet and was drilled to a total depth of 7,438 feet.
The hole encountered several coal beds, but no oil or gas.
Of the remaining deep holes, 6 had shows of liquid and/or gaseous hydrocarbons.
Subsequently, industry has conducted at least two core drilling campaigns for coal along the margins of the basin during the latter part of the decade.
The leases apparently were abandoned because of excessive disruption of the coal beds by faulting.
The extensive drilling in this relatively small basin indicates that the chances of finding significant amounts oil or gas there are minimal.
More recently, the Taylorsville Basin, Virginia, has been the subject of considerable industry interest and exploration.
In 1986, Texaco, Inc. drilled 5 diamond drill core holes in the Richmond basin each to a depth of 5,500 feet, apparently the limit of the drilling rig.
A sixth hole encountered crystalline basement at about 3,533 feet.
The core holes were followed in 1989 by a deep test, the Texaco W. B. Wilkins et ux Number 1, which was drilled into basement at a total depth of 10,135 feet.
Three of the core holes and the deep test had indications of oil and gas (Milici and others, 1991).
Subsequently, Texaco drilled a second deep test in Virginia.
The data for this last well, at present, remain confidential on file with the Virginia Division of Gas and Oil in Abingdon.
Three wells were drilled in York County, Pennsylvania in the early 1960's.
The deepest was drilled to a depth of 8,631 feet.
All were dry.
A dip fence of six core holes was drilled across the Newark basin, New Jersey, in the early 1990's.
The holes intersected a nearly continuous 20,000 foot-thick stratigraphic section across the lower two-thirds of the basin.
The data for these wells are available from the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Palisades, N. Y. (Petzet, 1991).
Resource potential: Overall, resource potential is generally poor to fair because of relatively low porosity and permeability of potential Mesozoic sandstone reservoirs.
Except for the Richmond Basin and perhaps for the Durham Basin, the play is largely undrilled.
The basins with the greatest overall potential for hydrocarbon production apparently are the Taylorsville, and perhaps the South Georgia, and some of the offshore basins, such as the Norfolk Basin.
Almost nothing is known of the internal stratigraphy and organic geochemistry of the latter two basins, however, and they were not evaluated in this study.
The following individual summaries are of those relatively large Mesozoic rift basins that appear to have some, if only marginal potential for generating and yielding commercial quantities of hydrocarbons.
