The stratigraphic sequence in the northeastern Brooks Range and coastal plain is divided into three primary sequences: (1) pre-Mississippian rocks, (2) the Mississippian to Cretaceous Ellesmerian sequence, and (3) the Cretaceous and Cenozoic Brookian sequence (Lerand, 1973; Grantz and others, 1975) (Figure BC3).
A fourth sequence, the Jurassic and Neocomian Beaufortian sequence of the Beaufort shelf, may also be present at the northern end of the transect.
The pre-Mississippian rocks are lithologically heterogeneous, variably deformed, and metamorphosed to greenschist facies.
In many places, these rocks contain penetrative to semi-penetrative structures that record contractional deformation of the Ellesmerian orogeny in the Early Devonian (Wallace and Hanks, 1990; Anderson and others, 1994; Moore and others, 1994; Bird, Chapage GG).
The Ellesmerian sequence overlies the pre-Mississippian rocks on a regional angular unconformity and consists of northerly-derived quartz-rich clastic and carbonate strata deposited on a south-facing continental margin.
In contrast, the overlying Brookian sequence consists of lithic sediments shed northward from the Brooks Range orogen into its foredeep during the Brookian orogeny.
The Brookian sequence also includes deposits derived from the northeastern Brooks Range foldbelt.
The Beaufortian sequence (Hubbard and others, 1987), as suggested by Grantz and others (1990, page 266), is restricted here to locally derived clastic deposits possibly associated with an episode of failed rifting on the Beaufort shelf.
Regional discussions of this succession and related deformation are provided by Brosgé and others (1962), Bird and Molenaar (1987), Molenaar and others (1987) Grantz and others (1990), Moore and others (1994), and Bird (Chapage GG).
The reader is directed to these publications for general information about the stratigraphy of the North Slope and ANWR.
The following discussion focuses on the stratigraphy as it pertains to the transect discussed in this paper.
Pre-Mississippian rocks are exposed in the Mt. Greenough and Aichilik River antiforms along the transect (Figure BC2).
The stratigraphy and age of these rocks are not well understood in detail because of sparse fossils, metamorphism, and structural complexity.
In the Mt. Greenough antiform, pre-Mississippian rocks consist of a thick succession of quartz-rich clastic strata, the Neruokpuk Quartzite (Reiser and others, 1978), and overlying chert and phyllite, calcareous, micaceous sandstone, and mafic volcanic rocks and associated carbonate rocks.
Late Cambrian trilobites have been recovered from mafic volcanic rocks and carbonate rocks at the structural top of these rocks, suggesting that most of the rocks are Cambrian and/or Proterozoic (Dutro and others, 1972; Reiser and others, 1980).
In the Aichilik River antiform, pre-Mississippian rocks consist of a variety of stratified lithologies, including black, pelloidal limestone, ripple-laminated calcareous sandstone, lithic and quartzose sandstone units, argillite, chert, and fine- to coarse-grained volcaniclastic rocks (Hanks, 1989).
The age of these rocks is poorly constrained, but is thought to be mostly Proterozoic (Reiser and others, 1980).
Lane (1991) and Kelley and others (1994), however, reported that rocks similar to some of these on the Canadian border span Proterozoic to Devonian time, suggesting that lower Paleozoic rocks may be present along the transect.
Other rocks that may be present in the subsurface along the southern part of the transect include a highly deformed unit of radiolarian chert and phyllite with lesser lithic sandstone, mafic volcanic rocks and limestone that are exposed over an extensive area west of Bathtub syncline (Reiser and others, 1980; Moore and others, 1994).
These rocks have yielded Ordovician graptolites (Moore and Churkin, 1984) and may contain strata that represent most of the lower Paleozoic (Reiser and others, 1980).
The deformed chert and phyllite unit is unconformably overlain by coarse-grained, nonmarine to marine clastic rocks of Middle Devonian age (Reiser and others, 1980; Anderson and others, 1994; Popov and others, 1994).
The clastic rocks, the Ulungarat Formation of Anderson and others (1994), rest on the deformed rocks on a prominent angular unconformity that constrains the main phase of Ellesmerian deformation to pre-Middle Devonian time (Moore and others, 1985; Anderson and others, 1994; Moore and others, 1994).
The Devonian clastic rocks themselves are tilted at a shallow angle with respect to overlying Ellesmerian sequence, indicating that another episode of deformation, probably extensional in nature, occurred between the Middle Devonian and Mississippian (Anderson and others, 1994; Moore and others, 1994).
The Devonian Okpilak batholith (Dillon and others, 1987), intrudes pre-Mississippian rocks about 30 km west of the transect (Figure BC2).
Although not exposed along the transect, its structural position would place it in the Aichilik River antiform if projected into the transect.
The batholith has played an influential role in Cenozoic deformation in the northeastern Brooks Range by deflecting regional structural trends and forcing a deeper level of detachment (Wallace and Hanks, 1990; Hanks and Wallace, 1990; Peapples and others, 1997).
The nature of pre-Mississippian rocks under the coastal plain along the transect is largely conjectural.
On the basis of exposures in the Sadlerochit Mountains (Robinson and others, 1989) and sparse well data west of the Canning River (Dumoulin, Chapage CC), Kelley (Chapage BR) recognizes three east-trending domains in seismic basement in the western part of the 1002 area that may extend eastward into the area of this transect.
He suggests that the southern unit consists of carbonate rocks correlative with the Proterozoic Katakturuk Dolomite, Proterozoic, Cambrian, and Ordovician Nanook Limestone, and Lower Devonian Mt. Copleston Limestone (see Bird, Chapage GG for descriptions of these units), a middle domain that may consist of quartzite and quartzose schist correlative with the Neruokpuk Quartzite, and a northern unit of clastic rocks of lower or middle Paleozoic age.
Because the regional stratigraphy and structure of the pre-Mississippian rocks are poorly understood, they are shown as undifferentiated on Figure BC3 and Plate BC1 and discussed as seismic and structural basement in the text.
Ellesmerian deformation and metamorphism may have made these rocks relatively competent structural units on a regional basis (Wallace and Hanks, 1990).
Furthermore, there is evidence that preexisting structures within the pre-Mississippian units in many places have influenced the location and trend of Brookian structures (Wallace and Hanks, 1990).
Pre-Brookian sedimentary layering and penetrative foliation may have produced locally anisotropic fabrics that influenced the resulting geometry of Brookian structures (Hanks, 1993).
