This hypothetical high-risk play is located along or beneath the leading edge, or toe, of the southern Appalachian thrust sheet in the Blue Ridge Thrust Belt Province, chiefly in eastern Tennessee and southern Virginia.
Conodont color alteration indices (Orndorff and others, 1988) indicate that thermal metamorphism in the fenster region of the Great Smoky Mountains in Tennessee is within the range for the generation of dry gas.
Because of considerable amounts of structural deformation, however, only the lower part of the Paleozoic section appears to be preserved beneath the thrust sheets.
Potential carbonate reservoirs are commonly recrystallized within the area and slaty cleavage occurs in the Ordovician black shales that are most likely to serve as source beds.
Thus, there seems to be very little potential for good quality reservoirs or source beds in the region.
The hydrocarbon production nearest to the southern Blue Ridge occurs in the Early Grove field in the Appalachian Basin Province in the central part of the southern Virginia Valley and Ridge, and in the Appalachian Plateau regions of western Virginia and northeastern Tennessee.
However, this production is 50 to 100 miles away and in an area greatly different geologically from the area of this play, which is adjacent to and beneath the southern Appalachian Blue Ridge thrust sheet.
The intervening Valley and Ridge physiographic province is structurally complex and, although untested, is considered to have little resource potential because of little potential for good quality reservoirs and source beds.
This hypothetical play was not formally assessed because of the general lack of evidence for potential source rocks and reservoirs.
The play occurs in the Cambrian and Ordovician sequence that occupies the footwall of the Taconic overthrust and associated thrust sheets.
It is dependent, to a great extent, on fracture porosity in Lower Paleozoic carbonate reservoir rock, including the Trenton, Black River, Utica, and Lorraine Formations, both in the exposed part of the footwall and/or in its extension into the subsurface beneath the Taconic allochthon.
Bayer (1988) reports that five wells were drilled in the northern part of the region, in Grand Isle, Franklin, and Chittenden counties, Vermont.
One of these is reported to have a show of oil.
Because more recent drilling has yielded shows of gas in southern Washington County, New York (Guo and others, 1990), the Champlain Valley Sub-Taconic Allochthon play (6802) is extended southward for a distance of 150 miles, from the Canadian border along the Champlain Valley into the region of the Taconic Overthrust, for the purposes of this assessment.
The stratigraphy and geologic structure of the Quebec Lowlands, Canada, is sufficiently similar to the stratigraphy and structure of northeastern New York and northwestern Vermont to be used as an analog for estimating the hydrocarbon resources of the Champlain Valley region.
In addition, the Lower Paleozoic stratigraphy in the northeastern part of the Finger Lakes region along the southern and eastern shores of Lake Ontario to the west of the Adirondack Mountains is similar to the lower part of the Paleozoic section in the Champlain Valley.
Of the two areas, the geology of the Quebec Lowlands is structurally more similar to that of the Champlain Valley than is the geology of the northwestern Finger Lakes region.
Nevertheless, because of stratigraphic similarities, the northwestern Finger Lakes region is also used here as an analogue for hydrocarbon accumulations in the lower part of the Paleozoic section in the Champlain Valley.
The Quebec Lowlands are situated in the Province of Quebec, Canada, generally between Quebec and Montreal in an area that is approximately 200 miles long and 50 miles wide.
Gas was first discovered in shallow wells drilled in the early 1900's by farmers who were attempting to find water (Dykstra, 1992).
The Point du Lac gas field was discovered in 1955 and produced gas commercially from 1962 to 1976.
This field is unusual in that it produced gas from unconsolidated Pleistocene sands that were charged from black shale source beds in the underlying Utica and Lorraine Formations.
The St. Flavien gas field was discovered in 1972 in the overthrust area by Shell Oil Company.
A subthrust well by Shell Oil Company, Shell St. Simon Number 1, tested the Beekmantown at about 420 MCFPD, which is not commercial in an area of complex geology and moderate drilling depths (Dykstra, 1992).
Bow Valley Industries et al St. Simon Number 1 tested a lower dolomite of the Beekmantown Formation at about 13,000 feet and found a show of gas that was 93 percent carbon dioxide.
In general, the Quebec Lowlands area trends to the northeast and is underlain by a Cambrian and Ordovician stratigraphic sequence of siliciclastic and carbonate rocks (Beiers, 1976).
Structurally, the Quebec Lowlands are divided into four zones from west to east, the platform zone, the external zone, the internal zone, and the nappe zone.
Normal faults, active during the earliest Paleozoic, are characteristic of the platform zone.
The lowermost Paleozoics of the platform zone are bordered on the northwest by a basement of crystalline rocks and on the east by thrust sheets that were emplaced upon the platform during the Taconic orogeny.
The external, internal, and nappe zones mark the progressive increase of the deformation of the Quebec Lowlands from west to east.
The external zone is characterized by subhorizontal thrust faulting within the Utica/Lorraine sequence (Beiers, 1976).
This faulting has increased the fracture porosity of the shale–siltstone sequence and is the cause of numerous shows in wells drilled therein for hydrocarbons.
The internal and nappe zones are characterized by relatively large-scale imbricate thrust sheets.
In these zones, the potential hydrocarbon-bearing traps are the footwall structures in the Lower Paleozoic sequence beneath the surface thrust sheets.
The structure of Champlain Valley/Taconic allochthon/Green Mountain anticlinorium is similar to that of the Quebec Lowlands as shown by the COCORP New England transect, a deep seismic reflection profile across the New England Appalachians (Ando and others, 1984).
On the west side of the transect, in easternmost New York, a relatively thin cover of Paleozoic rocks overlies extended Precambrian Grenville crystalline basement.
To the east, in New York and western Vermont, the Taconic allochthon occurs as a subhorizontal thrust sheet, above the Champlain thrust fault, that places relatively deepwater clastic and carbonate rocks of the continental rise sequence upon the approximately time-equivalent strata of the carbonate shelf.
Farther to the east in Vermont, the crystalline rocks of the Green Mountain anticlinorium occupy the upper reaches of a major tectonic ramp that extends downward, sharply to the east to a depth of 19 mi.
This play, 6802, occurs to the west of the Green Mountains, where the shelf sequence is exposed along the west flank of the Adirondack Mountains and where that sequence occurs beneath shallow thrust sheets.
The play occurs in the Cambrian and Ordovician sequence that occupies the footwall of the Taconic overthrust and associated thrust sheets.
Potential reservoirs occur in all strata, ranging from sandstones of the Potsdam Group (Cambrian) at the base, through the predominantly carbonate strata of the Beekmantown, Chazy, and Black River Groups (Ordovician) to the shales, siltstones, and sandstones of the Utica and Lorraine Groups (Ordovician) (Guo and others, 1990, Beiers, 1970, Dykstra, 1992).
It is dependent primarily on the fracture porosity that had been developed in Lower Paleozoic carbonate reservoir rock, Trenton and Black River Formations, both in the footwall and/or beneath the Taconic allochthon.
In general, the oldest formations of the platform sequence are those of the Potsdam Group, which was deposited directly upon crystalline basement.
The Potsdam consists of impure, feldspathic sandstones at the base that are overlain by relatively clean quartz sandstones.
These are in turn overlain by the dolomites of the Beekmantown Group, calcareous sandstones and limestones of the Chazy Group, dolomites and limestones of the Black River Group, thin-bedded and shaly limestones of the Trenton Group, and up to 1200 feet of massive, calcareous black shales of the Utica Group, the probable source rock.
The Utica is also a self-sourced reservoir rock, a fractured continuous-type accumulation that produces at least small amounts of gas almost everywhere it is drilled.
The Utica is overlain by at least 5000 feet of shales, siltstones, and sandstones of the Lorraine Group, which is overlain in turn by red shales and sandstones of the Richmond Group (Beiers 1976).
Organic content of the Utica Group in the Lowland is as much as 3% and thermal maturation is suitable for the generation of gas.
When drilled, shales and siltstones of the Utica and Lorraine almost always exhibit shows of gas, and the shales are most productive where they have been extensively faulted (Beiers, 1976).
Dykstra (1992) points out that thermal maturation models indicate that hydrocarbon generation in the autochthon occurred during the early phases of the Taconic orogeny and culminated with the emplacement of the thrust sheets.
Traps in the autochthon and beneath the thrust sheets were charged early so that the initial porosity was preserved.
In contrast, rocks in front of the thrust belt were charged later, in the Devonian, but only after much of the porosity had been destroyed diagenetically.
Gas, thus, appears to occur potentially in commercial quantities in two structural settings, in the faulted and deformed shales of the Utica and Lorraine Formations in the external zone of deformation, and in subthrust areas of the internal and nappe zones.
Calculations made by log analysis of fractured Utica shales in the Quebec Lowlands (Aguilera, 1978) indicate that the formation may contain 5 BCF of gas per section (square mile, 640 acres) and that the average well would produce initially about 500 MCFPD.
Cumulative production after 20 years is estimated to be about 2.5 BCFG.
This estimate is based on a daily production rate of about 296 MCFPD for the average well after 20 years.
Experience from other shale gas fields suggests that this decline rate is too optimistic and that the well would be producing much less, perhaps 50 MCFPD after 20 years.
If so, the cumulative production estimate for the average well made by Aguilera (1978) is too high and the total resource is overestimated.
The northeastern part of the Finger Lakes region contains 11 fields that have produced gas from the Trenton and Black River Formations.
Except for the structural complexities of the eastern thrust sheets, these fields occur in strata that are most likely to be potential reservoirs in the Champlain Valley/Taconic thrust sheet play and, thus, provide an analog for the potential field-size distribution in the Taconic, Champlain Valley region.
These Finger Lake region fields encompass about 55 sq mi in an area of approximately 2468 sq mi or about 2.2 percent of the area.
Average ultimate production per acre for these fields is 3.7 MMCFG.
The potentially productive area of the Champlain Valley is about 6000 sq mi, or about 2.43 times the area of the northeast Finger Lakes region.
If it is assumed that structural complexity would reduce the productive acreage to 1 percent of the area, then only 60 square miles would be productive, or about the same area as the northwest Finger Lakes region.
The field sizes of the latter, thus, can be used directly in estimating the gas resources of Trenton in Champlain Valley.
Bayer (1988) summarized the oil and gas tests drilled into the northern part of the Champlain Valley, Vermont, none of which proved to contain commercial quantities of hydrocarbons.
Since then, data from a well called the Finnegan boring that was drilled in Washington County, N. Y., were published by Guo and others (1990).
The well encountered the Taconic thrust at 2764 feet, entered basement at 7440 feet and was in crystalline rocks to a TD of 7758 feet.
The well contained a show of gas and oil residues.
Guo and others (1990) concluded that the Trenton, Black River, Chazy interval has the greatest potential for producing natural gas in this area because it contains the greatest amount of porosity and is of lower (better) thermal maturity than underlying strata.
Commercial production depends, however, on the identification of fracture porosity reservoirs, perhaps deeply buried beneath Taconic thrust sheets (Ando and others, 1984).
The Utica and Lorraine Formations also may produce gas in commercial quantities.
