Total known oil and gas resources of the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province (figure 1) are estimated and summarized in table 3.
Historical production and estimates of remaining reserves are available in the public domain for all producing fields in Arctic Alaska (Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, 2004; Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, 2006); however, similar data are not available for inplace oil.
For this reason, more uncertainty is associated with estimates of inplace oil than with those of ultimate recoverable resources (table 3).
The original inplace estimate for reservoirs of the Elles­merian sequence (figure 2) in known petroleum accumulations is about 30 billion bbl of oil, of which about 15 billion bbl of oil and 38 trillion ft3 of gas is recoverable.
These strata include the main reservoir in the Prudhoe Bay oil field (figure 1), from which approximately 12 billion bbl of oil has already been produced (Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, 2006).
The high recovery factor (>50 percent) reflects the exceptional reservoir quality along the Barrow arch of the main siliciclastic units in the Ellesmerian sequence, including the Kekiktuk Conglomerate, Ivishak Sandstone, and Sag River Sandstone (figure 2).
The original inplace estimate for reservoirs of the Beau­fortian sequence (figure 2) in known accumulations is about 10 billion bbl of oil, of which about 5 billion bbl of oil and 12 trillion ft3 of gas is recoverable.
These strata include the main reservoirs in the Kuparuk River field, from which approximately 2 billion bbl of oil has already been produced, and the main reservoir in the Colville River unit (Alpine pool and some satellite pools), which is expected to produce more than 500 million bbl of oil.
A recovery factor of about 50 percent reflects a combination of good to excellent reservoir quality, the occurrence of light (API gravity, 38–40°) oil in several accumulations, and horizontal well-production strategies implemented in recently developed accumulations.
The original inplace estimate for reservoirs of the Brookian sequence (figure 2) in known accumulations is about 40 billion bbl of oil, of which about 3 billion bbl of oil and 2 trillion ft3 of gas is recoverable.
Estimated ultimate recovery for oil includes offshore discoveries (for example, the Hammerhead and Kuvlum) yet to be developed.
Brookian reservoirs are generally heterogeneous and, when charged with lighter oil in stratigraphic traps, such as the Tarn (API gravity, 37°), recovery factors generally are lower than in Ellesmerian and Beaufortian reservoirs.
Estimated ultimate recovery for gas includes accumulations in the Brooks Range foothills (for example, the Gubik) yet to be developed.
Huge accumulations of heavy (API gravity, 8–22°) oil occur in Brookian reservoirs in the Kuparuk River (West Sak and Ugnu pools), Milne Point (Schrader Bluff pool), and Prudhoe Bay (Orion pool) units.
In the Kuparuk River field alone, Werner (1987) reported an inplace estimate of 18 to 40 billion bbl for most of these heavy-oil accumulations.
Estimated mean volumes of undiscovered oil and gas resources for NPRA (figure 4), including the adjacent State offshore area and Native holdings within NPRA, are 11.99 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum (crude oil and natural-gas liquids) and 73.03 trillion ft3 of gas (nonassociated and associated) (table 4; Bird and Houseknecht, 2002; Schuenemeyer, 2003).
Subsequent to that study, industry has reported data from new discovery wells in the northeastern part of NPRA.
The new data from Beaufortian reservoirs indicate that the accumulations contain less oil and more gas and condensate than previously estimated, mostly on the basis of hydrocarbon composition in the Alpine accumulation just east of NPRA (figure 3).
If these new data are representative of undiscovered Beaufortian reservoirs in NPRA, less crude oil and more natural-gas liquids and associated gas may be present (figure 4; table 4).
USGS-estimated mean volumes of undiscovered oil and gas resources for the central North Slope (figure 4), located east of NPRA and west of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) and including the adjacent State offshore area, are 4.46 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum and 37.52 trillion ft3 of gas (table 4; Bird and others, 2005).
USGS-estimated mean volumes of undiscovered oil and gas resources for the 1002 Area of ANWR, including the adjacent State offshore area and Native holdings on the ANWR coastal plain, are 10.55 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum and 8.60 trillion ft3 of gas (table 4) (Schuenemeyer, 1999; Bird and Houseknecht, 2001).
MMS-estimated mean volumes of undiscovered oil and gas resources for the Federal offshore area (figure 4) are (1) for the Chukchi Shelf at water depths less than 100 m, 15.38 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum and 76.77 trillion ft3 of gas; (2) for the Beaufort Shelf at water depths less than 500 m, 8.22 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum and 27.65 trillion ft3 of gas; and (3) for the Hope Basin, 0.15 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum and 3.77 trillion ft3 of gas (table 4; U.S. Minerals Management Service, 2006).
The total volumes of undiscovered oil and gas resources in the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province can be approximated by summing all mean volumes, yielding more than 50 billion bbl of total liquid petroleum and more than 227 trillion ft3 of gas (table 4).
Total estimated mean volumes of undiscovered oil and gas resources are approximately equal for both onshore and offshore areas.
These total estimated mean volumes lack the ranges of uncertainty inherent in assessments of undiscovered resources.
The mean estimates for each assessment area, including oil and gas volumes at the 95- and 5-percent-confidence levels, are listed on figure 4.
Ranges of uncertainty cannot be aggregated to total resources for the entire Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province because of differences in the assessment methods used by the USGS and MMS.
Approximately 15 billion bbl of oil has been produced from the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province, and proven reserves are estimated at more than 7 billion bbl of oil and 35 trillion ft3 of gas.
Most oil production is from Ellesmerian reservoirs, consisting of Mississippian through Triassic marine carbonate and marine to nonmarine siliciclastic deposits that accumulated on the shelf of a passive continental margin.
Lesser production has been from Beaufortian reservoirs, consisting of Jurassic through Early Cretaceous marine siliciclastic deposits associated with the rift opening of the Canada Basin, and from Brookian reservoirs, consisting of Cretaceous through Tertiary marine to nonmarine siliciclastic strata deposited as wedges of sediment shed from the Brooks Range orogenic belt.
Most production is from structural and combination structural-stratigraphic traps, although several recent oil discoveries are in purely stratigraphic traps.
Mean estimates of undiscovered, technically recoverable petroleum resources in conventional accumulations for the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province indicate that more than 50 billion bbl of liquid petroleum (oil and natural-gas liquids) and more than 227 trillion ft3 of gas (nonassociated and associated) remains to be discovered, distributed approximately equally between the Federal offshore area (24 billion bbl of oil and 108 trillion ft3 of gas) and combined onshore and State offshore areas (27 billion bbl of oil and 119 trillion ft3 of gas).
