One previous report (Dube and others, 2000) refers to the intervals within the Lewis Shale as four informal members, each capped by a regional flooding surface.
Within the Campanian second-order sequence, the present assessment study recognizes five, and possibly a sixth, third-order sequences within the Lewis, each replete with third-order sequence boundaries and maximum flooding surfaces (figure 2C).
Three of the third-order sequences are within the lower part of the Lewis Shale, and the fourth, fifth, and the possible sixth thirdorder sequences lie within the Lewis Shale above the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed.
Each MFS is identified on well logs as a shale-rich interval that extends across the basin and overlies a parasequence set of shoreface sandstones to the southwest.
Two third-order maximum flooding surfaces that extend from the central part of the SJB to the southwest can be identified in Lewis Shale well logs and cross sections below the Huerfanito (figure 2C).
The first maximum flooding surface (MFS) overlies the Cliff House Sandstone and the corresponding Cliff House transition interval of the Lewis.
The second maximum flooding surface (MFS) overlies the La Ventana Tongue and the laterally equivalent Otero interval of the Lewis.
The overlying Chacra Tongue and laterally equivalent Navajo City interval are overlain by the maximum marine flooding surface associated with the Huerfanito Bentonite.
Here, the second-order and the third-order maximum flooding surfaces coincide.
Each of these three maximum flooding surfaces can be traced basinward on well logs throughout the Lewis Shale in the SJB.
Within the upper part of the Lewis Shale, in the thick Ute interval, there are two additional shale-rich intervals that extend westward over slightly back-stepping parasequence sets of the correlative Pictured Cliffs Sandstone.
The lower of the two shale intervals extends southwestward over a slightly backstepping parasequence set of shoreface sandstones in the Pictured Cliffs.
In addition, the lower shale interval is overlain by a downlapping clinoform pattern of time lines based on ammonite correlations in the well-log cross section (figure 2C) (Molenaar and others, 2002).
The uppermost shale interval is associated with an aggradational parasequence set of shoreface sandstones in the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone.
This aggradational pattern was investigated by Roberts and McCabe (1992) and attributed by them to a slight pause in shoreline progradation.
This aggradational pattern is interpreted here to be associated with the third-order MFS at this position.
These two additional shale breaks in the Ute interval appear to delineate the fourth and fifth, and the possible sixth, third-order sequences within the Lewis Shale.
In addition to serving as sequence-stratigraphic markers for well-log correlation, the third-order maximum flooding surfaces form the natural breaks in the Lewis Shale that have been historically used to divide the Lewis into four informal intervals, which are, in ascending order, 1. the Cliff House transition, 2. Otero, 3. Navajo City, and 4. Ute intervals (figures 2B and 2C).
Although sequences are typically defined as lying between sequence boundaries (Van Wagoner and others, 1990), the Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals of the Lewis Shale as previously defined lie between the third-order maximum flooding surfaces and not the associated sequence boundaries.
Additionally, previous reports have not recognized the additional third-order sequences in the Ute interval described in this assessment report.
In addition to the maximum flooding surfaces, thirdorder sequence boundaries can also be recognized on the figure 2C cross section.
The third-order sequence boundaries associated with the maximum flooding surfaces are inferred from the stacking pattern of the shoreface parasequence sets within the Cliff House transition, La Ventana, Chacra, and Pictured Cliffs discernable in electric logs and by the landward shift in facies and the subsequent deepening events indicated by the marine shale intervals.
The critical observations of basinward shift in actual facies associated with the sequence boundaries are not possible without direct observations of the facies from core or outcrops, which were not made in the present study.
Despite this limitation, sequence stratigraphic concepts require a sequence boundary between maximum flooding surfaces (Van Wagoner and others, 1990).
At the top of each of the third-order backstepping parasequence sets of the Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals there is a marked progradation of the sandbody at the top of the parasequence set.
The sequence boundary is thus placed just below this sandbody, on the presumption that it represents a slight basinward shift in facies due to a relative sealevel drop or stillstand.
The shoreface sandstones recognized on the cross section (figure 2C) within the basal Cliff House and La Ventana and Chacra Tongues represent third-order parasequences in sequence-stratigraphic terms.
Within the basal Cliff House Sandstone, the shoreface parasequences form a back-stepping pattern except for the uppermost sandstone, which builds out slightly basinward.
The subtle progradation of this uppermost sandstone may be due to it overlying the third-order sequence boundary and thus being part of the HST in this third-order sequence.
Alternatively, it may be part of a thin low-stand systems tract overlying the sequence boundary.
The sandstone parasequence set of the basal Cliff House is then overlain by the marine flooding surface separating the Cliff House transition from the overlying Otero interval (figure 2C).
The backstepping pattern results in a vertical well-log pattern in which successively higher coarsening-upward units are slightly more distal in facies than those immediately underlying.
This backstepping accounts for the observed slight “finingupward” character of the Cliff House transition interval of the Lewis (Mavor and others, 2003), despite its generally coarser grain size compared to the overlying intervals in the Lewis Shale.
In a detailed study of basal Cliff House sandbodies on the northwest side of the SJB, Olsen and others (1999) documented high-order prograding parasequence sets within the generally backstepping basal Cliff House sandbody.
These prograding sandbodies probably represent fourth-order parasequence sets.
The La Ventana Tongue of the Cliff House Sandstone, located stratigraphically above and farther to the southwest than the basal Cliff House Sandstone, internally displays a more vertical aggradational pattern of shoreface parasequences, with a slight progradational parasequence at the topage.
The subtle progradation of this uppermost parasequence again may be due to its deposition as the uppermost part of the third-order HST, or it may be a small remnant of the lowstand systems tract above the third-order sequence boundary.
The La Ventana shoreface parasequences extend into the Otero interval of the Lewis Shale where they form the siltstones and mudstones that produce gas from this part of the section in the central SJB.
The La Ventana is also overlain by a thirdorder marine flooding surface as demonstrated by the marine shale signature in the well logs, extending to the southwest from the Lewis Shale over the top of the La Ventana shoreface parasequence set.
The Chacra Tongue of the Cliff House Sandstone, again located stratigraphically higher and farther to the southwest than the underlying La Ventana, internally forms a slightly forward-stepping package of shoreface parasequences.
These progradational parasequences and their distal equivalents extend into the Lewis Shale and form the sandy to silty mudstone beds in the Navajo City interval that commonly produce gas.
Again, the uppermost parasequence builds out basinward, suggesting it overlies the third-order sequence boundary near the top of the Navajo City interval.
The Chacra Tongue is also overlain by a marine flooding surface—this one coincident with the second-order maximum marine flooding surface in the basin represented by the shale interval that contains the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed.
Similar to the designated internal intervals within the Lewis Shale below the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed, the Ute interval above the Huerfanito contains several third-order maximum flooding surfaces and sequence boundaries.
The strongly prograding shoreface sandstones within the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone are punctuated by at least two backstepping intervals (figure 2C).
Each of these intervals likely contains both a third-order sequence boundary and a maximum flooding surface similar to those described for the lower part of the Lewis Shale below the Huerfanito.
The three resulting intervals in the Ute are thus of the same order of magnitude in thickness and duration as the three intervals in the lower part of the Lewis.
The duration of each of the six intervals is approximately 1 to 1.5 million years based on the ammonite zonations (Obradovich, 1993; Roberts and Kirschbaum, 1995; Molenaar and others, 2002).
Recognition of the third-order sequence boundaries and marine flooding surfaces allows subsurface correlation between the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues shoreface sandstones and the equivalent distal sandstones and siltstones within the corresponding informal intervals designated in the Lewis Shale.
In addition, it suggests that cycles similar in magnitude to those within the Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals of the lower part of the Lewis Shale are also present within the much thicker Ute interval in the upper part of the Lewis Shale.
Application of these sequence stratigraphic concepts allows an interpretation not only of the stratigraphic and sedimentologic relations between the units but also of the genetic relation of depositional units and significant surfaces as potential reservoirs, source rocks, and migration pathways for hydrocarbons within the Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System.
In addition, the sequence stratigraphic interpretations indicate that concepts applied to exploration for and production of gas from the lower part of the Lewis Shale may also be applicable to the Ute interval of the Lewis Shale above the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed, and to similar Cretaceous third-order sequences in other basins.
Recognition of third-order cycles in the Ute interval on the scale of those previously recognized in the Cliff House transition, Otero, and Navajo City intervals suggests that additional similar reservoirs and source rocks may be present in the upper part of the Lewis Shale associated with the third-order sequence boundaries and maximum flooding surfaces.
