The Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System (TPS) in the San Juan Basin Province contains a continuous gas accumula-tion in three distinct stratigraphic units deposited in genetically related depositional environments: offshore-marine shales, mudstones, siltstones, and sandstones of the Lewis Shale, and marginal-marine shoreface sandstones and siltstones of both the La Ventana Tongue and the Chacra Tongue of the Cliff House Sandstone.
The Lewis Shale was not a completion target in the San Juan Basin (SJB) in early drilling from about the 1950s through 1990.
During that time, only 16 wells were completed in the Lewis from natural fracture systems encountered while drilling for deeper reservoir objectives.
In 1991, existing wells that penetrated the Lewis Shale were reentered by petroleum industry operators in order to fracture-stimulate the Lewis and to add Lewis gas production onto preexisting, and presumably often declining, Mesaverde Group production stratigraphically lower in the section.
By 1997, approximately 101 Lewis completions had been made, both as reentries into existing wells and as add-ons to Mesaverde production in new wells.
Based on recent industry drilling and completion practices leading to successful gas production from the Lewis and because new geologic models indicate that the Lewis Shale contains both source rocks and reservoir rocks, the Lewis Shale TPS was defined and evaluated as part of this U.S. Geological Survey oil and gas assessment of the San Juan Basin.
Gas in the Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System is produced from shoreface sandstones and siltstones in the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues and from distal facies of these prograding clastic units that extend into marine rocks of the Lewis Shale in the central part of the San Juan Basin.
Reser-voirs are in shoreface sandstone parasequences of the La Ven-tana and Chacra and their correlative distal parasequences in the Lewis Shale where both natural and artificially enhanced fractures produce gas.
The Lewis Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50220261) is thought to be self-sourced from and self-sealed by marine shales and mudstones deposited within the Lewis Shale that enclose clastic parasequences in the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues.
The gas resource is thought to be a continuous accumulation sourced from the Lewis Shale throughout the depositional basin.
In the Lewis Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50220261), for continuous gas resources, there is an F95 of 8,315.22 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG) and an F5 of 12,282.31 BCFG, with a mean value of 10,177.24 BCFG.
There is an F95 of 18.08 million barrels of natural gas liquids (MMBNGL) and an F5 of 47.32 MMBNGL, with a mean of 30.53 MMBNGL.
This report presents the results of a geologic assessment of the undiscovered oil and gas resources of the Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System (TPS) within the San Juan Basin (SJB) Province of northwestern New Mexico and southwestern Colorado (figure 1).
The Cretaceous Lewis Shale TPS represents one of the four total petroleum systems defined for this project to assess the undiscovered hydrocarbon resources of the San Juan Basin (see chapage 1, this CD-ROM; figure 3).
The four total petroleum systems are, in ascending stratigraphic order, the Todilto TPS, Mancos-Menefee Composite TPS, Lewis Shale TPS, and Fruitland TPS.
The Lewis Shale TPS contains three distinct strati-graphic units deposited in genetically related depositional environments: 1. offshore-marine shales, mudstones, siltstones, and sandstones of the Lewis Shale, and marginal-marine shoreface to turbidite sandstones and siltstones of both 2. the La Ventana Tongue, and 3. the Chacra Tongue of the Cliff House Sandstone.
Although the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues had produced gas for many years prior to, and were included in, the 1995 USGS assessment of oil and gas resources in the San Juan Basin (Huffman, 1996), the Lewis Shale was not assessed as part of that effort.
The Lewis Shale was not a completion target in the San Juan Basin in early drilling from about the 1950s through 1990.
During that time, only 16 wells were completed in the Lewis where natural fracture systems were 2  Total Petroleum Systems and Geologic Assessment of Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources in the San Juan Basin Provinceencountered while drilling for deeper objectives (Jennings and others, 1997a,b).
Burlington Resources operates approximately 6,500 of more than 18,000 existing wells in the SJB (Dube and others, 2000).
The Lewis Shale was drilled through but not tested, and thus is “behind pipe” in about 3,500 wells operated by Burlington Resources.
Many of these wells extend down to the Mesaverde Group and older stratigraphic units (Jennings and others, 1997a,b; Dube and others, 2000; Bereskin, 2001a,b, 2003).
In 1991, Burlington Resources began a program to recomplete existing wells that penetrated the Lewis Shale in order to fracture-stimulate the Lewis (Jennings and others, 1997; Dube and others, 2000) and to add Lewis production to preexisting, and presumably often declining, Mesaverde production.
By 1997, Burlington Resources reported that approximately 101 Lewis completions had been made, both as reentries into existing wells and as add-ons to Mesaverde pro-duction in new wells (Jennings and others, 1997; Dube and oth-ers, 2000).
Burlington Resources had described a trend in the SJB that includes both the 16 Lewis completions from naturally fractured wells and successful new fracture-stimulated comple-tions (Jennings and others, 1997; Dube and others, 2000; Shir-ley, 2001).
This trend contains more than 3,500 existing wells operated by Burlington Resources that penetrate the Lewis (Dube and others, 2000).
In addition, several recent publica-tions have indicated that commercial gas production currently exists from the Lewis Shale (Jennings and others, 1997a,b; Dube and others, 2000; Shirley, 2001).
For these reasons, and because new geologic models indicate that the Lewis Shale contains both source rocks and reservoir rocks, the Lewis Shale TPS was defined and evaluated as part of this U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) oil and gas assessment in the San Juan Basin.
This report assesses the undiscovered gas resources within the Lewis Shale TPS in the San Juan Basin.
The Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System lies within the San Juan Basin in northwestern New Mexico and southwest-ern Colorado (figure 1).
The San Juan Basin is an asymmetric structural depression of Laramide age (figure 2A) that contains strata ranging in age from Cambrian to Quaternary (Fassett and Hinds, 1971).
Upper Cretaceous sediments in the SJB (figure 2B) were deposited in the Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway, and, similar to most other Cretaceous strata in the SJB that were deposited in response to alternating marine transgressions and regressions, they form a series of interfin-gered continental, marginal-marine, and marine units.
Conti-nental fluvial and coal deposits on the southwestern margin of the SJB grade to the northeast into marginal-marine, estuarine, and shoreface strata.
All of these strata continue to grade northeastward into offshore-marine rocks that originally were deposited in the depositional basin that extended eastward into Kansas and adjoining states (see for example, Molenaar, 1977; Roberts and Kirschbaum, 1995).
Strata within the Lewis Shale TPS include the Lewis Shale and rocks that are within or are correlative to the Mesaverde Group (figure 2B).
The Mesaverde Group was first described by Holmes (1877), but Collier (1919) later named the unit for exposures at the type locality in what is now Mesaverde National Park in southwestern Colorado.
Numer-ous studies describe the stratigraphy in and around the San Juan Basin (Sears and others, 1941; Pike, 1947; Beaumont and others, 1956; Hollenshead and Pritchard, 1961; and many oth-ers).
Many other regional studies related to economic coal and petroleum resources in the San Juan Basin have also addressed stratigraphic issues (for example, Fassett, 1977, 2000; Mole-naar, 1983; Molenaar and others, 2002; and many others).
Holmes (1877) also named the overlying Pictured Cliffs Sand-stone, which interfingers with and progrades over the Lewis Shale to the northeast in the SJB (figure 2B).
The Mesaverde Group in the San Juan Basin was depos-ited on the western shelf of the epicontinental Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway.
The SJB lies south of a major subsid-ing Cretaceous foreland basin that was bounded on the west by the Sevier fold and thrust belt (Weimer, 1960; Molenaar, 1983).
The SJB during the Cretaceous was bounded to the west by the Mogollon rim in central Arizona.
During deposition of rocks forming the Lewis Shale TPS, the western shoreline of the Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway passed through the southwest part of the SJB with the seaway extending east-ward through Kansas (Roberts and Kirschbaum, 1995).
The Mesaverde Group comprises several stratigraphic units and facies, in ascending order: shoreface sandstones of the Point Lookout Sandstone, marginal-marine to continental deposits of the Menefee Formation, and shoreface sandstones of the Cliff House Sandstone.
The marine strata of the Lewis Shale inter-finger with and grade southwestward into shoreface sandstones of both the Cliff House Sandstone and the Pictured Cliffs Sandstone (figure 2B).Although the general stratigraphy of the Mesaverde Group was established long ago, more recent studies employing well-log cross sections and modern sedimentologic concepts have led to a greater understanding of the surface and subsurface marine shales and shoreface deposits, especially in the Cliff House Sandstone.
The Cliff House comprises three units: 1. the basal Cliff House Sandstone, 2. the La Ventana Tongue, and 3. a unit designated by several names but most often called the Chacra Tongue (figure 2B).
There has been much discussion in the literature as to the nam-ing and designation of the “Chacra.”
