Porosity decreases with depth in sedimentary basins, owing to the combined effects of compaction and cementation.
The porosity profile in any individual well depends on the maximum effective stress, which is generally determined by the maximum burial depth.
As a result, presentday porosity profiles can be interpreted in terms of maximum burial depth and subsequent uplift.
Using sonic logs and porosity measurements in cored wells, we adapt a method of calculating porosity in siliciclastic rocks from sonic logs and compare it with several other algorithms relating sonic velocity and porosity.
We then calculate porosity from sonic logs in wells within and adjacent to the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska (NPRA).
Evaluating the shale-rich Early Cretaceous Torok Formation, we observe that the porosity-depth relation can be represented by one or two straight lines in each well.
The porosity-depth lines are offset among wells in different areas within the northern NPRA, reflecting differences in uplift along the Barrow Arch.
When the line segments are replotted in terms of porosity against vitrinite reflectance instead of presentday depth, the trends from areas within the coastal plain nearly coalesce, showing that the effect of maximum burial depth explains much, but not all, of the differences in the porosity profiles.
Relative to a single offshore well where zero uplift is assumed to have occurred, estimates of uplift along the Barrow Arch range from less than 1,000 ft just east of the NPRA to 4,600 ft at Point Barrow.
In the foothills of the southern NPRA, the computational method can provide only minimum estimates of uplift, which are less than, but compatible with, estimates of uplift based on the apatite fission-track method.
The porosity gradients in wells in the northern NPRA (coastal plain and near offshore) are similar to those in wells in other areas calculated by other workers: about 3 percent per 1,000 ft.
In the southern NPRA (foothills), porosity gradients are lower than in the northern NPRA — that is, porosity decreases less rapidly with depth in the foothills (approx 1 percent per 1,000 ft) than in the coastal plain (max 12 percent per 1,000 ft).
An explanation of the wide variation in porosity gradients in the NPRA awaits a better understanding of the evolution of pore pressure and effective stress within the context of the burial and uplift history of the Colville Basin.
The goals of this study are to estimate presentday porosity as a constraint on basin-modeling efforts and to constrain estimates of regional uplift and erosion on the basis of the variation in porosity gradients.
In this study, we include data from all wells within the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska (NPRA) that have sonic logs, a few wells close to the east boundary of the NPRA, and four offshore wells, for a total of 40 wells (figure 1; table 1).
Most wells within the NPRA were drilled during the years 1975–81 by the U.S. Government.
Well density is adequate along the north coastline and the southeastern NPRA but poor elsewhere, owing to the small number of wells and the absence of sonic logs in the early (1944–53) NPRA drilling program.
Core porosity measurements were available from 17 wells distributed over the NPRA and in one offshore well.
The depth ranges and formation names are listed in table 2, along with gamma-ray values and sonic traveltimes from well logs, averaged over the same depth ranges as the core data.
Formations range in age from Mississippian to Cretaceous.
Porosity measurements were included from clastic intervals but not from carbonates.
Core porosities in unconfined samples from the Nanushuk Formation, Torok Formation, and Kemik Sandstone, all of Cretaceous age, were adjusted by multiplying the measured value by 0.86, a reduction factor that we obtained from core tests on confined, stressed samples.
Porosities in formations deeper than the Kemik Sandstone were not adjusted.
Sonic velocity is plotted against core porosity in figure 2, keyed to formation.
Younger (Brookian) sedimentary rocks plot below older (Ellesmerian) sedimentary rocks, and samples from the Kingak Shale fall between the two.
The method of converting sonic well-log data to porosity is based on an analysis of the data plotted in figure 2 and listed in table 2.
The algorithm used by Issler (1992) for shales is extended herein to all siliciclastic rocks.
Because several methods of converting sonic logs to porosity are available, we compare the algorithm used in this paper with others reported in the literature.
After establishing a method of calculating porosity and comparing it with other methods, we next examine the porosity-depth trends in shales of the Torok Formation, a thick and areally extensive marine mudstone of Early Cretaceous age, with the purpose of estimating uplift and erosion within and adjacent to the NPRA.
Issler (1992) calculated porosity in shales from sonic logs and used the resulting porosity-depth trends to infer uplift and overpressure in the Beaufort-Mackenzie Basin of northwestern Canada, an area comparable in size to the NPRA.
The plot of porosity versus depth in figure 3 summarizes the average porosity-depth trends for rocks of Late Cretaceous and Tertiary age in five areas of the Beaufort-Mackenzie Basin.
Porosities in the inner delta (area 3), an area interpreted to have little or no uplift since the time of maximum burial, fall along the trend shown by the red curve.
Porosities in the central and outer shelves (areas 1, 2) are higher at a given depth than in the inner delta, a fact attributed to overpressuring caused by rapid deposition.
Porosities in the main, western, and southern deltas (areas 4, 5) are lower at a given depth than in the inner delta.
The upward and leftward shift of the porosity-depth curves is attributed to uplift and erosion (arrow, figure 3).
Other workers have used straight-line segments to represent porosity-depth trends in shales.
Hunt and others (1998) presented porosity profiles in shales based on the uptake of an organic liquid by dried, evacuated shale cuttings.
They demonstrated that, for porosities less than 35 percent, two straight-line segments provide a better fit to the data from Tertiary sections in the U.S. gulf coast than does a single exponential curve.
The upper linear trends persist until the porosity decreases to about 10 percent; below this depth, shale porosity tends to remain constant (figure 4).
In two wells, Hunt and others calculated porosity gradients of 3.3 percent per 1,000 ft, close to those determined by Issler (1992).
Porosity gradients in other wells plotted in figure 4 are as low as 1.04 percent per 1,000 ft.
Sonic logs are generally presented in terms of “travel­time” (∆t), which is a reciprocal velocity expressed in units of microseconds per foot.
Other terms for traveltime are slowness and transit time.
Traveltime is readily convertible to velocity; the sonic velocity v is given by 10^6/∆t ft/s (304.8/∆t km/s).
Sonic logs are commonly used to estimate porosity, which is one of the rock parameters controlling sonic velocity.
Many empirical expressions, sometimes called transforms, have been derived to relate sonic velocity and porosity in siliciclastic rocks.
These empirical expressions satisfy available datasets but are not necessarily based on a physical model.
In this report, we use a transform called the acoustic formation factor (AFF) to estimate porosity from sonic logs, and we compare this transform with some of the other transforms documented in the literature.
