This paper presents a geometrically constrained (balanced) cross section that extends northward for 142 km from the Brooks Range to the Beaufort shelf in the northeastern part of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) in Alaska.
The cross section crosses the eastern part of the 1002 area of ANWR where it transects the Niguanak and Aurora dome structural highs.
These highs are large domal geologic structures in the subsurface that might have high potential for oil and gas.
The cross section was constructed using known geologic relations in the Brooks Range and reprocessed depth sections of the proprietary seismic lines 85-50 and 84-40 from the 1002 Area.
The cross section offers an integrated stratigraphic and structural interpretation of the geology in the frontal part of the northeastern Brooks Range fold-and-thrust belt and a minimum-shortening estimate of the amount of deformation.
Principal new interpretations of subsurface stratigraphic relations include: (1) the Ellesmerian sequence, the principal reservoir for the Prudhoe Bay oil field, thins northward to about the apex of the Niguanak high by northward onlap below and increasing erosion from above; (2) the regional Lower Cretaceous unconformity (LCU) is present on the southern flank of the Niguanak high and probably farther north; and (3) the Jago River Formation represents the nonmarine part of a thick, areally extensive, northward thinning uppermost Cretaceous and Paleocene deltaic sequence that was shed northward from the Brooks Range and whose marine equivalents underlie much of the coastal plain.
Deformation of these units is interpreted to be underlain by a basal detachment that lies at a depth of about 7 km in pre-Mississippian rocks at its northern end under the coastal plain.
Modeling indicates that the basal detachment descends southward to a depth of over 15 km in the Brooks Range.
About 72 km of northward displacement is calculated for the transect, with 37 percent shortening in duplexes developed in the Mississippian to Cretaceous Ellesmerian sequence and in the underlying pre-Mississippian rocks and 43 percent shortening in the Cretaceous and younger Brookian sequence.
The available age relations indicate that the folding and thrusting began at, or near the end, of the Late Cretaceous at the restored position of the rocks in the southern end of the cross section, and by the Eocene had propagated northward to a position near the present Beaufort Sea coast.
Reactivation of thrusting in the Miocene caused renewed uplift in the southern part of the coastal plain and the Niguanak high.
The Niguanak high and Aurora dome are isolated basement culminations located as much as 50 km north of the regional sharp increase in structural relief within pre-Mississippian rocks at the South 1002 fault system of Grow and others (Chapage NA, Figure NA1).
The isolated basement culminations are interpreted to be bounded by lateral ramps at their eastern and western limits, suggesting that the basal detachment forms a northward-trending trough or fairway for Cenozoic deformation in pre-Mississippian rocks where transected in this study.
It is possible that the north-trending trough in the basal detachment allowed the basement-involved deformation to advance to a more northerly position in this area in part because of the presence of the thick Paleocene deltaic section which provided the structural load necessary for a deeper level of detachment.
The stratigraphic-structural model suggests that some of the Paleozoic and Triassic reservoir rocks found in the Prudhoe Bay oil field may be present on the southern flank of the Niguanak high but are unlikely father north.
These rocks may be erosionally truncated by the Lower Cretaceous unconformity, potentially forming a stratigraphic trap similar to the one in the Prudhoe Bay oil field.
Lower Cretaceous reservoir rocks like those in the Kuparuk River and Point Thomson field might also be expected over parts of the northern part of the 1002 area above the unconformity.
A third oil and gas play may lie in deep marine rocks of Paleocene age in the southern part of the 1002 area.
These may hold turbidite units that might be prospective for oil and gas if the reservoir quality is good and they have not been excessively breached by the deformation as suggested by this study.
These conclusions suggest that significant oil and gas accumulations may be present in the northern part of the eastern 1002 area, particularly on the south flank of the Niguanak high, although a high level of risk is assigned because of questions about the presence or absence of reservoir facies, reservoir quality, and timing of deformation.
