For several decades, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) has collected cores, drill cuttings, and other subsurface data from boreholes drilled to evaluate the oil shale deposits in the Eocene Green River Formation, as well as from oil and gas tests, in the Greater Green River Basin of southwestern Wyoming, northwestern Colorado, and northeastern Utah (figure 1).
The Greater Green River Basin (GGRB) is the name given to a group of five sub-basins.
The names of these sub-basins and their locations within the Greater Green River Basin are as follows: (1) the Hoback Basin in northwestern portion of the GGRB; (2) the Green River Basin in the western portion of the GGRB; (3) the Great Divide Basin in the north eastern portion of the GGRB; (4) the Washakie Basin in the east-central portion of the GGRB; and (5) the Sand Wash Basin in the southeastern portion of the GGRB (figures 1 and 2).
The Greater Green River Basin is one of three basins in the western United States that contains oil shale of the Green River Formation.
The other two are the Piceance Basin in western Colorado and the Uinta Basin in eastern Utah and western Colorado (figure 2).
It was from these areas that data were collected and preserved for use by researchers and private industry in anticipation of the time when Green River oil shale deposits would become an economically viable alternate source of fossil fuel.
In southwestern Wyoming, the Green River Formation was deposited in Lake Gosiute during early to middle Eocene time, with the majority of oil shale deposits accumulating in what is defined as the Tipton Shale Member, the Wilkins Peak Member, and the LaClede Bed of the Laney Member (figure 3).
The types of data collected within the Greater Green River Basin include: (1) Fischer (shale oil) assays (American Society for Testing and Materials, 1980) on cores from wells drilled to assess oil shale and drill cuttings from oil and gas tests, (2) geophysical and lithologic logs of drill holes, and (3) measured sections from outcrops.
Twenty-three subsurface stratigraphic cross sections were constructed using these various types of data for basinwide correlations and as a basis for the in-place assessment of the oil shale resources in the basin carried out by the USGS.
These cross sections are presented on plates 1–23 in this report.
The Green River Formation consists of lacustrine and fluvial-lacustrine rocks that were deposited in and adjacent to the Eocene Lake Gosiute that covered much of southwestern Wyoming, northwestern Colorado, and northeastern Utah from roughly 52.5 to 47.5 Ma (Smith and others, 2008).
The lake formed in a structural and sedimentary basin that formed during the Laramide orogeny, a major mountain-building episode in the western United States, which extended from Late Cretaceous through Eocene time.
Lake Gosiute underwent two major expansions represented by the Tipton Shale Member and the LaClede Bed of the Laney Member of the Green River Formation (figure 3).
These units contain the richest and most persistent oil shale zones in the Greater Green River Basin.
The oldest rocks of the Green River Formation in the Greater Green River Basin are known as the Tipton Shale Member.
This member is divided into the freshwater Scheggs Bed and the overlying saline Rife Bed (Roehler, 1991a).
A northward-thickening wedge of marginal lacustrine deposits known as the Farson Sandstone Member of the Green River Formation (figure 3) (Roehler, 1992b) separates the Scheggs and Rife Beds in the Green River Basin portion (western) of the Greater Green River Basin (figures 1, 2).
In the northeastern portion of the Greater Green River Basin, the Farson Sandstone Member is overlain by the Alkali Creek Tongue of the Wasatch Formation (Roehler, 1991a).
These units are not distinguishable in the subsurface, therefore they are labeled together in the cross sections that were constructed covering the northeastern portion of the Greater Green River Basin.
After the deposition of the Tipton Shale Member of the Green River Formation, Lake Gosiute regressed to cover a much smaller area of the Greater Green River Basin, as well as becoming much shallower.
It was during this regressive period of the lake’s history that the Wilkins Peak Member of the Green River Formation was deposited (figure 3) (Bradley, 1959).
Although the Wilkins Peak Member contains significant oil shale, it is present in a much more restricted area than the underlying Tipton Shale Member and the overlying LaClede Bed of the Laney Member.
It is also interbedded with higher amounts of sandstone and mudstone.
Following this regressive period, and subsequent deposition of the Wilkins Peak Member of the Green River Formation, Lake Gosiute expanded again.
During this expansion, the lake covered a much larger area of the Greater Green River Basin than during Wilkins Peak time, as well as becoming much deeper.
This expansion is recorded in the rock record, and is known as the Laney Member of the Green River Formation, named by Roehler (1973).
The Laney Member contains the youngest oil shale-bearing strata that are included in the USGS oil shale assessment; the richest oil shale beds are found in the basal part of the member, known as the LaClede Bed.
In the eastern portion of the Greater Green River Basin, the LaClede Bed grades into the laterally equivalent Godiva Rim Member of the Green River Formation (Roehler, 1991e).
The rich oil shale deposits of the LaClede Bed are interbed­ded in some portions of the Greater Green River Formation by a tuffaceous siltstone layer informally known as the Buff Marker bed (Roehler, 1973).
Of the 23 cross sections prepared for this assessment, 10 were created from data in the Green River Basin west of the Rock Springs Uplift (plates 1–10), 7 were created from data in the Washakie Basin east of the Rock Springs Uplift (plates 11–17), and 6 were modified from previously published cross sections by Roehler (1990, 1991b, 1991c, 1991d, 1992a) (plates 18–23).
All plates use the same formation tops that were used in the oil shale assessment of the Greater Green River Basin (see Johnson and others, chapter 1, this report).
The cross sections (plate 24) were constructed using 201 of the existing 427 Fischer Assay oil-yield histograms, 11 geophysical logs collected from wells drilled for oil and gas exploration, and 38 surface sections measured from outcrops within the Greater Green River Basin; table 1 provides an explanation of the types of data that are presented in the spreadsheet that accompanies this report (Spatial_Information. xlsx).
In a few cases, both oil-yield histograms and geophysical logs were available for the same well.
The true tops and bases of oil shale intervals, such as for the LaClede Bed and Tipton Shale Member, can commonly be picked on geophysical logs.
However, when these identified well depths are compared to those reported for cuttings, there is commonly a discrepancy owing to the difficulty in accurately compensating for the time delay between when a particular interval is being drilled and when the cuttings from that interval reach the surface.
For this assessment, we chose to use the reported tops at which the oil shale units were encountered in the cuttings, because using the geophysical log data would have resulted in portions of rich oil shale units being excluded in many of the holes.
