The Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province, encompassing all the lands and adjacent Continental Shelf areas north of the Brooks Range-Herald arch, is one of the most petroleum-pro­ductive areas in the United States, having produced about 15 billion bbl of oil.
Seven unitized oil fields currently contribute to production, and three additional oil fields have been unitized but are not yet producing.
Most known petroleum accumulations involve structural or combination structural-stratigraphic traps related to closure along the Barrow arch, a regional basement high, which has focused regional hydrocarbon migration since Early Cretaceous time.
Several oil accumulations in stratigraphic traps have been developed in recent years.
In addition to three small gas fields producing for local consumption, more than 20 additional oil and gas discoveries remain undeveloped.
This geologically complex region includes prospective strata within passive-margin, rift, and foreland-basin sequences.
Oil and gas were generated from multiple source rocks throughout the region.
Although some reservoired oils appear to be derived from a single source rock, evidence for significant mixing of hydrocarbons from multiple source rocks indicates a composite petroleum system.
Both extensional and contractional tectonic structures provide ample exploration targets, and recent emphasis on stratigraphic traps has demonstrated a significant resource potential in shelf and turbidite sequences of Jurassic through Tertiary age.
Recent estimates of the total mean volume of undiscovered resources in the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province by the U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Minerals Management Service are more than 50 billion bbl of oil and natural-gas liquids and 227 trillion ft3 of gas, distributed approximately equally between Federal offshore and combined onshore and State offshore areas.
The Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province, one of the most petroleum-productive areas in the United States, currently is an exploration target for new additions to reserves.
New discoveries, along with the economic benefits of applying innovative exploration and production technologies, evolving industry demographics, rising oil and natural-gas prices, and the anticipation that northern Alaska natural-gas resources may become economic and marketable through a planned pipeline, have stimulated a renewed intensity in leasing and exploration activity.
Until recently, this activity was focused mostly on State onshore and offshore areas of the central North Slope, as well as the Federal offshore area immediately adjacent to the Federal-State boundary.
Exploration in these areas has been mostly for oil in relatively large structural or combination structural-stratigraphic traps similar to that at the Prudhoe Bay field (figure 1), where approximately 12 billion bbl of oil has been produced and more than 3 billion bbl of reserves remains (table 1; Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, 2006).
Discovery of the 500-million-bbl Alpine oil field in 1994 (figure 1) on the Colville River delta and success at the nearby Tarn oil field (>100 million bbl recoverable) stimulated interest in exploration for stratigraphic traps.
As a result, exploration since 1995 has progressed westward and southward from the main productive fairway into areas where new oil fields in stratigraphic traps may be discovered.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of known petroleum accumulations in the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province and to review recent assessments of undiscovered, technically recoverable, conventional petroleum resources.
Those resources associated with continuous-type (unconventional) petroleum accumulations, such as low-permeability basin-centered gas, gas hydrates, and coal-bed methane, are not addressed.
The Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province extends about 1,100 km from the United States-Canadian border westward to the maritime boundary with Russia, and from 100 to 600 km northward from the Brooks Range to an arbitrary boundary at the approximate edge of the Continental Shelf (figure 1; Bird, 2001).
Although the edge of the Continental Shelf provides a welldefined physiographic boundary for the province, this edge does not represent a geologic limit to potential petroleum resources.
The offshore part of the province is characterized by a relatively narrow (100 km wide) shelf in the Beaufort Sea (Scherr and Johnson, 1998) and a broad (600 km wide) shelf in the Chukchi Sea (Sherwood and others, 1998).
The province is bounded on the south by the Brooks Range-Herald arch orogenic belt and offshore to the north by the passive continental margin of the Canada Basin (figure 1).
The principle geologic features of the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province are summarized in figure 1.
The Chukchi and Arctic platforms are remnants of a late Paleozoic through early Mesozoic south-facing (present coordinates) continental margin.
These features are separated by the Hanna trough, a north-trending structural sag characterized by extensional normal faulting, in which thick layers of sediment accumulated mostly during the Devonian(?) and Mississippian and into the early Mesozoic.
Sherwood and others (1998) considered the Hanna trough to be a failed rift.
The Barrow arch and adjacent hingeline fault zone formed during Jurassic to Early Cretaceous rifting.
The oceanic Canada Basin and flanking passive margin resulted from this rifting event.
At the southern margin of the Arctic and Chukchi platforms and overlapping in time with rifting to the north, an arc-continent collision created the Brooks Range, the adjacent Colville foreland basin, and, presumably, the Herald arch orogenic belt (Moore and others, 1994).
Contractional deformation in Tertiary time created the fold-and-thrust belt that extends northward from the Brooks Range and is expressed topographically as the foothills belt (Moore and others, 1994).
Although the stratigraphic record of the Arctic Alaska Petroleum Province extends into the Precambrian, rocks with a potential for petroleum accumulations are dated at Mississippian and younger (figure 2).
The traditional grouping of the rocks into tectonostratigraphic sequences, as proposed by Lerand (1973) and modified by later investigators, emphasizes tectonic history, provenance, and genetic relations.
This section briefly describes the tectonostratigraphic sequences north of the Brooks Range.
The Franklinian sequence mostly includes Devonian and older sedimentary rocks representing diverse origins and a complex geologic history.
These rocks have been buried and metamorphosed beyond the thermal stage of oil preservation across most of Arctic Alaska, and so they are considered to be economic basement.
The Mississippian through Triassic Ellesmerian sequence consists of carbonate and shallow-marine to nonmarine silici­clastic deposits.
On the Arctic platform, Ellesmerian strata are continental-shelf deposits that accumulated on a south-facing passive margin.
From a northern pinchout or erosional edge near the Barrow arch (figure 1), they thicken southward to about 2 km (Moore and others, 1994).
Westward, Ellesmerian strata thicken rapidly into the Hanna trough and, beyond, thin onto the Chukchi platform.
In the Hanna trough, Devonian(?) and Mississippian rocks are interpreted as synrift deposits, and post-Mississippian strata as thermal sag-phase deposits (Sherwood and others, 1998).
Although the Ellesmerian sequence contains both petroleum source and reservoir rocks, source rocks, which lie near the top of the sequence, did not generate petroleum until buried by Beaufortian and Brookian deposits.
The Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous Beaufortian sequence (Hubbard and others, 1987), consisting of synrift deposits derived locally or from the north, is a stratigraphically complex, mud-dominated sequence with multiple unconformities and large variations in thickness (Houseknecht and Bird, 2004) that contains petroleum source and reservoir rocks.
Normal faulting and formation of sediment-filled grabens and half-grabens, some containing more than 3 km of fill, occur mainly north of the present coastline.
Uplift and erosion along the rift margin created a regional Lower Cretaceous unconformity (figure 2), considered to be the “breakup” unconformity (Grantz and May, 1982).
This unconformity, which progressively truncates older rocks northward onto the Barrow arch, is partly responsible for many of the largest oil accumulations in northern Alaska by providing a hydrocarbon-migration pathway for charging multiple, subunconformity reservoirs.
Cretaceous mudstone overlying the unconformity serves as a seal, creating combination structural-stratigraphic traps under favorable circumstances, such as at the Prudhoe Bay oil field.
Cretaceous and Tertiary deposits derived from the Brooks Range orogen are assigned to the Brookian sequence.
These voluminous deposits filled the Colville foreland basin, overtopped the rift shoulder (Barrow arch), and built the passive margin that forms the present continental terrace north of Alaska.
The Brookian sequence consists of a complex assemblage of siliciclastic strata that include distal, condensed marine mudstone (Hue Shale); relatively deep marine basinal, slope, and outer-shelf mudstone and turbidite sandstone (Torok, Seabee, and Canning Formations); and shallow-marine to coal-bearing nonmarine sandstone, mudstone, and conglomerate (Nanushuk, Tuluvak, Prince Creek, Schrader Bluff, and Sagavanirktok Formations).
Organic-rich beds of the Hue Shale are important oil source rocks, and Brookian mudstones may contain gas source rocks.
Reservoir rocks consist of turbidite and shallow-marine to nonmarine sandstone, and known oil and gas accumulations occur in both structural and stratigraphic traps within the Brookian sequence.
Sediment accumulation in the Colville Basin and on the passive margin north of the Barrow arch generally progressed from west to east during the Cretaceous and Tertiary (Bird and Molenaar, 1992); an exception to this pattern is a significant Tertiary depocenter that was active in the northern Chukchi Sea during the early Tertiary (Sherwood and others, 1998).
Deposition of a thick Brookian sequence provided the overburden necessary for thermal maturation of petroleum source rocks in Ellesme­rian, Beaufortian, and Brookian strata.
