The Blue Ridge Thrust Belt (068), Piedmont Province (069), Atlantic Coastal Plain Province (070), and the New England Province (072) are generally east of the Appalachian Basin Province (067), while the Adirondack Province (071) is to the north.
Except for the Appalachian Basin, these provinces do not produce oil or gas and are not currently viewed as prospective for oil and gas.
Consequently, they will be treated very briefly here.
Three hypothetical conventional plays were defined and are discussed in detail.
The Blue Ridge Thrust Belt Province (068) underlies parts of eight States from central Alabama to southern Pennsylvania.
Along its western margin, the Blue Ridge is thrust over the folded and faulted margin of the Appalachian basin, so that a broad segment of Paleozoic strata extends eastward for tens of miles, buried beneath these subhorizontal crystalline thrust sheets (Harris and others, 1981).
At the surface, the Blue Ridge consists of a mountainous to hilly region, the main component of which are the Blue Ridge Mountains that extend from Georgia to Pennsylvania.
Surface rocks consist mainly of a core of moderate-to high-rank crystalline metamorphic or igneous rocks, which, because of their superior resistance to weathering and erosion, commonly rise above the adjacent areas of low-grade metamorphic and sedimentary rock.
The province is bounded on the north and west by the Paleozoic strata of the Appalachian Basin Province and on the south by Cretaceous and younger sedimentary rocks of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
It is bounded on the east by metamorphic and sedimentary rocks of the Piedmont Province (069).
Geologically, the Piedmont Province (069) consists of a variety of sharply folded and faulted supracrustal metasedimentary and plutonic intrusive rocks that are generally younger than the 880-1,000 million year old rocks of the Blue Ridge Thrust Belt Province (068) to the west.
In addition, thick sections of Early Mesozoic sedimentary rocks containing intruded and extruded mafic igneous rocks fill rift basins that are widely distributed in the Piedmont and beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain.
The metasediments within the Piedmont Province may be as young as Ordovician.
These Precambrian through lower Paleozoic crystalline rocks extend to the east under the Upper Jurassic through Cenozoic sediments of the Atlantic Coastal Plain Province.
The Atlantic Coastal Plain Province (070) is comprised of Upper Jurassic through Cenozoic sedimentary rocks which overlie much older Precambrian through lower Paleozoic basement rocks.
A number of Mesozoic rift basins, containing Late Triassic and Early Jurassic sedimentary rocks, are located within the Atlantic Coastal Plain Province and occur beneath a major regional unconformity, the breakup unconformity of Schlee and Klitgard (1986).
The Piedmont and Atlantic Coastal Plain Provinces produce neither oil nor gas.
The Adirondack and New England Provinces (071 and 072) include sedimentary, metasedimentary, and plutonic igneous rocks, mainly of Cambrian and Ordovician age, similar lithologically to rocks in the Blue Ridge and Piedmont Provinces (068 and 069) to the south.
The uplifted, nearly circular Adirondack Mountains consist of a core of ancient Precambrian rocks that are surrounded by upturned Cambrian and Ordovician sedimentary rocks.
Minor shows of gas have been reported in lower Paleozoic carbonate rocks in the folded and thrust-faulted sequence of western Vermont; however, no commercial oil or gas production has been established anywhere in these provinces.
In these five provinces, three conventional hypothetical plays were defined: Southern Appalachian Sub-Thrust Sheet Play (6801), Champlain Valley/Sub-Taconic Allocthon Play (6802), and East Coast Mesozoic Basins Play (6901).
