The study area is located at the Barito Basin, South Kalimantan Province known as major coal producer basin in Indonesia.
Cleats are described as a natural fractures developed in coal seams and acted as the main parameters in controlling permeability performance in the coal bed methane development.
Therefore, the knowledge of origin and character cleats is very important because of their influence on recovery of methane, and the local and regional fluid flows.
This paper is presented results of integrated surface to subsurface data supported by regional cleats mapping, characterization and analysis in relation to Coal Bed Methane (CBM) exploration and development in the basin.
There are two main coal seams in the study area, Late Eocene and Lower to Middle Miocene of Warukin Fm. with thickness ranging from 2 m up to 60 m.
Subsurface data show three different coal zone observed from six well data.
The occurence of coal seams in each wells are based on value of RHOB with 1.75 as cut off value.
Coal rank are classified as Lignite - Sub Bituminous C with calorific values ranging 5000 – 8000 Cal/gr containing Ash content of 8%-17%.
There are two methods of cleat and/or fracture measurements used in this study: scan-line and windows sampling (100 cm x 100 cm dimension).
More than 20,000 cleats and/or fractures were measured from 60 scan-lines and 39 windows measurement locations.
Cleats distribution and orientation indicates three major orientations WNW-ESE, NNW-SSE, and NE-SW trending.
They are: an inverse linear is the best fit data for the bed thickness-density relationship, an exponential relationship between average density and cleats height, a power-law relationship between average density and average spacing, and cleats density increases related to regional structural position where they increases towards main deformation zone (Meratus Mountain).
Cleats spacing varies with coal type and ash contents.
Relationship between cleats spacing and coal rank, spacing indicates decreasing from low to high rank coal.
Relationship between cleats density with calorific value and ash contents showing general relationship where high calorific value with low ash content tends to have large density.
This cleats origin might be subjected from several processes, where the cleats, which formed during coalification, can be superimposed by later processes such as hydrostatic pressure and tectonic stresses and also can be affected by the coal composition.
The study area is located at the South Kalimantan (known also as Borneo) Province.
Geographically lies between 114° 59' 50.000" - 115° 29' 50.000" E and 2° 33' 25.000" - 3° 17' 55.000" S. Data were mainly collected in Rantau, Binuang, and Tanjung Areas, cleat attributes (spacing, aperture, height, and orientation) were measured in Tanjung and Warukin Formation.
Geologically, this study area is located in Barito Basin.
The Barito Basin is located along the southeastern edge of the stable Sundaland continent (Figure 1).
To the west, the basin is bounded by Schwaner Mountains, which consists of metamorphosed rocks of continental character, granitic and tonalitic plutons and volcanic rocks.
To the east is bounded by the Meratus Range, a recently uplifted zone of highly folded and thrusted Pre-Tertiary rocks, presumably a suture or collision zone.
To the north, the basin is rises up in the Adang Flexure area.
The southern boundary is unclear, because of no structural features and facies change observed, but it is suggested extends to the south into the Java Sea.
Kalimantan Island  (Borneo) is considered as the most stable island in Indonesia and is a continental area which has little or no seismicity (Figure 1).
However, the island was subject to multiple deformation events during Tertiary, generating complex structural and stratigraphic setting.
Tectonic evolution of this island had become growing debates among workers.
Three major Tertiary basins were formed, caused by rifting along the Sundaland margin including Barito and Asem-Asem Basins.
The stratigraphic successions of the area can be divided into four mega sequences including pre-rift, syn-rift, post-rift and syn-inversion sequences (Figure 2).
The Pre-rift sequence of Barito Basin is presently represented by the basement complex which underlies the basin.
Being located along the margin of continental Sundaland, the basement is composed of a variety of amalgamated terrains; those are continental basement in the west and accreted zones of Mesozoic and early Paleogene rocks in the east.
The distribution of rock types in the subsurface is not clear.
It is notable, however, that at least in the east of Barito; the basement is evidently Meratus type rather than acidic-crystalline Barito Platform type.
Basin subsidence which continued through the Oligocene and by Middle Miocene had resulted in sediments constituting the upper part of the sequence.
The calcareous sediments of the Berai Formation fed the basin at that time.
The lower part of the formation, below the massive limestone, consists of a condensed paralic and inner neritic sequence of shale and marls.
This passes up into thick massive Late Oligocene limestone, which is succeeded by Early Miocene shale, marls and thin limestone.
The syn-inversion sequence of the Barito Basin consists of Warukin and Dahor Formations.
The Upper-Early to Late Miocene Warukin sediments was deposited into rapidly subsiding basin as the result of the continental uplift in the west and the Meratus uplift in the east.
The resulted sediments are up to several thousands of meters thick in the central part of the basin.
The Warukin Formation consists of shallow and marginal marine clastic of sand, shale, silts and coal (Figure 3).
The last intense tectonics in Plio-Pleistocene, which reactivated the Meratus Range against the rigid Barito Platform, resulted in the shedding of clastic sediments and tectonic molasses of the Plio-Pleistocene Dahor Formation westward filled, into the Barito Basin.
60 scan-line and 39 windows measurement locations with total 19,738 cleats were measured.
Field data presented in this study most likely corresponding to macrocleats.
Most data were collected on mine walls (cross-section view measurement).
Cleats data were collected for several coals from Tanjung and Warukin Formations.
Most data were collected from Warukin Formation and subdivided into Lower, Middle and Upper Warukin.
To better understand of cleats development, cleats distribution and orientation are presented based on their formation.
Based on the distribution and orientation map, it can be summarized for each formation where the cleats of the coal measured.
From all data measured showing three main orientation; WNW-ESE, NNW-SSE and NE-SW orientations.
From these data subdivided based on their formation, Tanjung and Warukin Formation showing equal face cleats orientation.
Face cleats orientation within Tanjung and Warukin Formation has dominantly WNW-ESE direction.
Discrepancy is observed within Warukin Formation, where several locations have face cleats direction NE-SW direction differ by ~90° from other locations in the same interval.
The apparent discrepancy may have resulted from structural geology associated with strike slip faults nearby which formed a secondary cleat system or from improper identification of face versus butt cleats data in the field, insufficient measurement that complicates interpretation.
The regional maps of cleat orientation have distinguished domains and variable cleat strike, where the face cleats in Tanjung and Warukin Formations have general WNW-ESE orientation (Figure 5).
Uniformity of cleat strikes within domains indicates that fractures responded to regionally coherent stress patterns, which could reflect plate-scale stress or stresses related to uplift or basin geometry (Laubach et al., 1998).
By this mean the origin and evolution of coal (as an opening-mode fracture) can be attributed to compression, extension and other manifestation of tectonism.
The control of the tectonic stresses on the cleat formation is based on the intrinsic tensile forces and fluid pressure in coal beds.
The formation of cleat within Tanjung Formation might be related to the NW-SE trending rift basins were formed and followed by a prolonged period of subsidence and sedimentation extending into the Late Miocene.
While, the formation of cleat in the Warukin Formation is related to the transpression along Meratus Range which produces NW-SE compressive stress.
The face cleats extend along the SH direction and the butt cleats along the direction of horizontal minimum compressive principal stress (Shmin), so the regular reticular cleat pattern is formed in the basin.
The face cleat will represents the direction of horizontal maximum in situ stress (SHmax), and butt cleat along the direction of horizontal minimum in situ stress (Shmin), so the regular reticular cleat is formed (i.e. Su et al., 2001).
When the preferred fracture orientation is consistent with the principal stress over wide areas (Olson and Pollard, 1989; Laubach et al., 1998) suggests the cleat formation is nearly controlled and superimposed by tectonic stress.
With the assumptions that cleats were formed subvertically in flatlying bed, we tried distinguished the cleats origin and formation from first cleats formed to the latest cleats.
From this assumption all data were rotated back to the original coal bed, this done by rotated the bed including the cleats for each location and summarized in the Figure 6.
From data distribution on the crossplot charts we can interprets where the cleats which have subvertical dip (in this case above 75°) when coal bed horizontal possibly the cleats which have formed in the first stage while the cleats and/or fractures which have dip less than 75° are interpret to be formed in the later or secondary stages.
According to the previous explanations about cleat origin where different process may occur since cleat initially formed until now.
Another approach used to analyze cleat development is plotting the face cleats into a stereographic projection.
Based on the stereogram and orientation analysis the data are subgrouped into several domains.
For Tanjung, Lower Warukin, and Middle Warukin Formations plots showing at least three domains of the face cleats data set, while Upper Warukin Formation shows at least two domains of the face cleats data set.
These results indicate the complexity of data sets were could not be seen clearly from rose and strike vs. dip analysis.
This assert the cleats origin where subjected from several processes, where the cleats which formed during coalification can be superimposed by later processes such as hydrostatic pressure and tectonic stresses and also can be affected by the coal composition.
Apertures of cleat data observed at an interval of 0.01 to 0.3 cm, where most of data are range between 0.01 - 0.05 cm.
The height or length of the cleats are ranging from centimeters to meters, and bear in mind about the limitation to the height/length where the measured length is restricted to the limited scan-line and windows sampling dimension, so the height/length data are not completely reliable.
Variability in cleat size (aperture and height) in coal beds has been summarized by Laubach et al. (1998) where the cumulative frequency of cleat aperture follows a power law and cleats with large apertures tend to have large heights.
The summary chart of aperture and height of all scan-line locations shows the general trend where large apertures tend to have large heights (Figure 7A).
Measurement on mine highwalls shows that spacing between individual cleats ranges from microns to meters.
Average spacing of all scan-line locations are vary over the study area.
Average cleat spacing has been used to characterize the cleat relationship with the frequency.
Average spacing and frequency from all measurement locations in the study area and are plotted in the chart and follows a power law distribution trend line (Figure 7B).
Development of fracture porosity/permeability is one of the most important parameters for effective and economical coal bed methane production.
The abundant cleats are considered increasing permeability and are corresponding with what is expected as highly fractured reservoirs.
Scott (1999) used the relation proposed by Lucia (1983) to model permeability in coal.
Lucia (1983) proposed an equation which represents the relationship between permeability, abundance of fractures and fracture aperture.
Although Lucia’s study is based on carbonates, Scott (1999) suggested a similar approach where the matrix between fractures is considered impermeable in carbonates and coals, so the permeability occurs mainly through fractures.
Lucia’s relation indicates that permeability increases with the cube of the fracture aperture and varies with the inverse of the fracture spacing where k is permeability (darcys), w is fracture aperture (cm), and z is fracture spacing (cm).
The equation of Lucia (1983) is a modification of the standard definition of fracture permeability according to the cubic law, but simplified to account for only two variables (fracture aperture and spacing).
Another solution to estimate fracture permeability through open fractures by following a development similar to the one presented for solution vug (Aguilera, 1995).
In order to obtain relationship for fracture permeability attached to single point properties (kf) as follows (combined with Darcy’s law): 
Fracture permeability from equation 3 is attached to single point properties.
In general, some of the coals of Barito Basin have permeability in the range of 20 to 2000 md, but for some coals which have cleats with large apertures (>0.04 cm), the permeability can reach more than 2000 md.
Figure 10 gives a range of few permeability of coal where active CBM projects exist.
The tabulation implies a diversity of permeability in commercial projects.
The figure shows that the cleat permeability of Barito Basin can be analogous to the coal permeability of Powder River Basin and Forest City Basin, USA.
Cleats distribution and orientation indicates three major orientations WNW-ESE, NNW-SSE and NE-SW trending.
This study summarizes relationship between cleat attributes and cleats density.
They are: an inverse linear is the best fit data for the bed thickness-density relationship, an exponential relationship between average density and cleats height, a power-law relationship between average density and average spacing, and cleat density increases related to regional structural position where they increases towards main deformation zone.
Cleat spacing varies with coal type and ash content.
Relationship between cleats spacing and coal rank, spacing indicates decreasing from low to high rank coal.
Relationship between cleats density with calorific value and ash contents showing general relationship where high calorific value with low ash contents tends to have large density.
There might be no single process on the cleat formation, where different process may occur since cleat initially formed until now.
So, the cleats which formed during coalification can be superimposed by later processes such as hydrostatic pressure and tectonic stresses and also can be affected by the coal composition.
Some of the coals of Barito Basin have permeability in the range of 20 to 2000 md, but for some coals which have cleats with large apertures (>0.04 cm), the permeability can reach more than 2000 md.
The cleat permeability of Barito Basin can be analogous to the coal permeability of Powder River Basin and Forest City Basin, USA.
