Fission track data from the Mesozoic section in the Bathtub syncline provide the first indication that rocks along the transect were involved in renewed deformation.
The data show that the section cooled through the annealing zone for apatite at 62 Ma (Early Paleocene), followed by a younger episode of cooling at 50 Ma (Early Eocene) (O’Sullivan and others, 1993).
The cooling events probably represent uplift that was accomplished by erosional unroofing in response to structural thickening in the Ellesmerian and/or pre-Mississippian sections below the sampled strata.
If, as is commonly hypothesized in contractional fold belts, deformation at high structural levels in the now mostly missing Brookian section at Bathtub syncline is conjectured to have begun prior to the uplift of sub-Brookian rocks dated by the fission-track ages, the earliest deformation may have begun in the latest Cretaceous, coincident with the onset of sedimentation in the Jago River Formation.
To the north, the absolute time of onset of deformation is not yet firmly established, but must be recorded in the piggyback basin deposits in the upper part of the Jago River Formation (Potter and others, Chapage BD).
A tentative late Paleocene age is inferred for these strata by Potter and others, Chapage BD), although there is little age control on these deposits.
Convergence in dips on both the northern and southern flanks of the piggyback basin indicate that deformation synchronous with their deposition occurred on Brookian structures in the adjacent Aichilik high and other Brookian structures to the south that have been subsequently eroded.
No deformation in underlying Ellesmerian and pre-Mississippian rocks is indicated in this area at this time.
The Paleocene deformation front in the Brookian sequence probably advanced at least as far north as the major thrust duplication that emplaced the Kingak and Hue Shale now exposed above the Niguanak high.
If not involved in the deformation, these deposits would have been in position for continued sedimentation and hence to gain higher thermal maturity because of burial metamorphism under younger rocks.
A younger, post-Eocene episode of Brookian shortening is required, however, by the backthrust relations shown in the Jago ridge triangle zone because the Eocene strata had to have been deposited before the backthrusting could take place.
Oligocene deposits that unconformably overlie the Eocene strata show that formation of the triangle zone occurred prior to the Oligocene.
These relations suggest that the Paleocene deposystem now under the coastal plain saw protracted thinskinned deformation that lasted from the Paleocene to the Eocene.
Deformation in the pre-Mississippian section under the coastal plain in basement-involved structures along the transect probably began after formation of the thinskinned structures in the overlying Brookian section was largely completed because uplift of the deeper basement-involved structures have deformed the overlying thinskinned structures.
The oldest of the pre-Mississippian horses may be the Aurora dome duplex, which folds the Eocene, but not Oligocene strata, suggesting a Late Eocene age for this structure.
Strata in the lower part of the Jago River Formation on the south flank of the Sabbath Creek syncline, in contrast, have yielded apatite fission track ages that average about 23 Ma (Early Miocene) (O’Sullivan and others, 1993).
Although taken from Brookian strata, the position of these samples low in the Brookian succession argues that their cooling is related to uplift of the pre-Mississippian horse forming the Okerokovik River monocline, which lies in a structural position hindward of the pre-Mississippian horse at Aurora dome.
This relation suggests the possible presence of out-of-sequence thrust faults in the pre-Mississippian rocks in the southern coastal plain.
Alternatively, the Okerokovik River horse that lies beneath the southern flank of the Sabbath Creek syncline may have experienced reactivation that folded or tightened the southern limb of the Sabbath Creek syncline, thereby lifting the Jago River Formation through the annealing zone.
This horse is thought to be laterally correlative the Sadlerochit Mountains horse to the west, which also experienced Miocene uplift (O’Sullivan and others, 1993).
Relatively late movement on the regional flat at this location in the cross section (Plate BC1, cross section A), is mechanically possible only if the horse of pre-Mississippian rocks at the Niguanak high was constructed at the same time.
Folding of Oligocene and younger strata visible in seismic data along the western flank of the Niguanak high confirms a Neogene age for the structure.
Fission-track data at Leffingwell Ridge indicates a protracted history of uplift-related cooling that extends into the Miocene (J.M. Murphy, written comm., 1998) in that area as well.
This may suggest that much of the southern part of the coastal plain, including the Niguanak high, was involved in basement-involved deformation during the Miocene.
