Table BC2 shows a comparison of deformed and restored line lengths determined for key units shown in Plate BC1.
The top of the pre-Mississippian provides the only measure of the total amount of shortening over the entire length of the section.
On the basis of the structural model for pre-Mississippian rocks, about 72 km of shortening is calculated for deformed rocks portrayed in the section on this horizon between reference points A and B (Plate BC1).
From the pin at Leffingwell Ridge, where the regional detachment is inferred to terminate in the Kayak Shale, deformation southward in Ellesmerian strata to reference point D represents about 35 km of shortening, the same amount of shortening as calculated at the top of the pre-Mississippian section over virtually the same distance (pin to reference point B).
The shortening for latest Cretaceous and Paleocene strata in the Brookian sequence calculated from the truncation of the base of unit TKp in the hangingwall of the Jago ridge triangle zone (reference point E) to the most southerly exposures of this unit on the southern flank of Sabbath Creek syncline (reference point F) represents about 38 km of northward shortening.
For comparison, the shortening at the top of the pre-Mississippian unit over the Jago ridge, Niguanak high, and Okerokovik River monocline horses of pre-Mississippian rocks is 31.2 km (reference points A to C).
The similarity in shortening in the pre-Mississippian and Brookian duplexes over approximately the same interval is what would be expected for a passive-roof duplex (W.K. Wallace, written comm., 1999).
The age of the deformation modeled in the structural and stratigraphic restoration discussed above and shown in Plate BC1 is important for evaluating the oil and gas potential of the 1002 area.
The time when the deformation occurred can be estimated using a number of parameters including thermal data, field relations, and fission track data.
These data and their significance are evaluated below.
Representative thermal data including vitrinite reflectance data and conodont alteration indicies (Krumhardt, 1994; Bird and others, Chapage VR; unpublished proprietary data) from near the transect are plotted above the erosional profile on cross section A in Plate BC1 and their positions restored according to the structural model in cross section B.﻿ For vitrinite data, the empirical equation for determining the depth of burial for vitrinite reflectance data on the North Slope presented in Bird and others (Chapage VR) was used to determine the approximate thickness of eroded strata that once was present at each locality.
For conodont data, the maximum temperature attained by the conodonts was taken from Krumhardt (1994) and Bird and others (Chapage VR) and a maximum depth of burial was calculated assuming a geothermal gradient of about 30°C/km (the same geothermal gradient as that used by Cole and others, Chapage SM) for each sample.
The approximate thickness of eroded overburden above each vitrinite reflectance and conodont sample was measured from its restored position in cross section B (Plate BC1).
If due to burial metamorphism as assumed here, these restorations, shown as red bars above the erosional profile in cross section B (Plate BC1), approximate the maximum height of the stratigraphic column prior to erosion along the transect.
Although the vitrinite and conodont alteration data are not precise gauges of the depth of burial and the calculated maximum thickness of eroded strata is dependent on the restorational model on which they are plotted, the calculated maximum height of the restored stratigraphic column approximates a line of elevation that descends gradually from about 8 km above the datum at the base of the Kingak Shale at the south end of the section to about 6.5 km above the datum north of about km 90 of cross section B (Plate BC1).
North of that point, the maximum height of the calculated stratigraphic section descends abruptly northward to a lower elevation of about 2-3 km above the datum.
At the northern end of the section, however, vitrinite reflectance data from the Eocene and Oligocene sections are from higher stratigraphic positions and indicate only small amounts of previous burial.
The generally consistent level for the height of strata removed by erosion that was determined for Paleocene and older rocks in the central and southern parts of cross section B (Plate BC1) supports the assumption that metamorphism was of burial type, a conclusion previously reached by O’Sullivan and others (1993).
Moreover, it provides a measure of corroboration of the structural model shown in Plate BC1 in that the creation of the interpreted structures from the undeformed section accounts for the structural relief needed to attain the observed pattern of unroofing.
Farther north, the shape of the top of the calculated section, as modeled by the thermal data, approximates the geometry of a clinoform.
Although the original basin morphology may have been influenced by other factors such as thrust loading, the magnitude of the change in modeled thickness is best explained by progradation of a deltaic complex into a deep marine environment.
The profile suggests that it is reasonable to infer that a shelf­to-slope break was present in the vicinity of km 80 of cross section B (Plate BC1) prior to deformation.
Because the youngest rocks that contribute data to this curve are Paleocene, it is concluded that the calculated curve approximates the depositional profile near the end of Paleocene time.
The profile thus is consistent with the earlier inference developed from seismic facies analysis that a Paleocene shelf-to-slope transition must lie in the vicinity of the Aichilik high.
Several ancillary conclusions can also be drawn from the thermal modeling, including the following:
The top of the maximum thickness of eroded section in the southern part of cross section B lies at about 1 km above the level of modern deposition (i.e., sea level on the absolute scale) on the Beaufort shelf at the northern end of the section.
Deposition to approximately the same level along the entire section suggests that Brookian sedimentation has filled an accommodation space that has been controlled by consistent tectonic processes active over a long period of time.
The slightly higher (1km) level of the accommodation space in the southern part of the section probably reflects some combination of factors including (a) local tectonic effect of thrust loading near the Continental Divide thrust front of Wallace and Hanks (1990), (b) passive-margin-related subsidence in Ellesmerian time prior to deposition of the Brookian sequence, or (c) slight differential uplift along the Barrow arch due to rifting in the Canada basin in the Early Cretaceous prior to Brookian sedimentation.
The minimal burial indicated for Eocene and Oligocene strata at the north end of cross section B requires either (a) erosion of older strata (as shown for the Oligocene unit), or (b) thrust emplacement of relatively deep marine strata prior to the deposition of an overlying stratigraphic section (as hypothesized by the backthrusting of the Eocene section).
These results imply that only thin Eocene and Oligocene sections were deposited above the Paleocene strata in the Jago ridge structure, a conclusion consistent with the thermally immature vitrinite reflectance data from the Hue Shale above the Niguanak high.
It can be concluded form these observations, coupled with facies information from Brookian sequence rocks (e.g., Molenaar and others, 1987) and analogy with the history of the Colville basin to the west, that until Paleocene time the Brookian sequence was deposited in northward prograding fluvial-deltaic systems that worked to systematically fill the accommodation space north of the Early Cretaceous part of the Brookian orogenic front.
The sedimentary record at Bathtub syncline and in the Arctic Creek unit and Hue Shale preserves fragments of the slope and basin of what must have been a significant middle and Upper Cretaceous stratigraphic succession located in the position of the modern-day northeastern Brooks Range.
The sedimentary detritus in these deposits presumably was derived from the Brookian orogenic zone to the south.
Following deposition of these strata, a major increase in deposition occurred in the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene.
This period of active sedimentation marked renewed tectonic activity in the ancestral Brooks Range and heralded latest Cretaceous to Cenozoic deformation in the area of this transect.
