In this paper, I have presented an integrated stratigraphic model and geometrically constrained balanced cross section for a north-south transect in the eastern part of the 1002 area and northeastern ANWR.
The structural model was constructed using known outcrop relations in the Brooks Range, high quality, newly reprocessed seismic depth sections under the coastal plain and on the Beaufort shelf, and interpretations that result in conservative estimates of shortening.
The modeling suggests that deformed rocks at the surface lie on a basal detachment under the coastal plain at a depth of about 7 km at its north end and that the detachment descends southward to a depth of more than 15 km in the Brooks Range.
The cross section is a minimum-shortening model which requires 72 km of northward displacement for the 142-km transect and 37 to 43 percent shortening.
Along the profile, the contractional deformation first affected the Brookian sequence in the latest Cretaceous and by the early part of the Paleocene, Ellesmerian and/or pre-Mississippian rocks were involved in the deformation in the southern part of the profile.
On the coastal plain, deformation probably was active in the Brookian sequence where it formed a thinskinned fold-and-thrust belt in the Paleocene and Eocene.
Beginning in the Eocene and continuing in Miocene, the deformation involved rocks of the underlying pre-Mississippian basement, resulting in a relatively younger basement-involved structural style.
The timing relations indicate that deformation has continued to propagate northward into the Beaufort shelf where the thinskinned deformation has been active in Neogene and younger time (e.g., Grantz and others, 1987, 1990; Potter and others, Chapage BD).
The presence of duplicated pre-Mississippian rocks under the coastal plain at the Aurora dome and at the Niguanak structural high is surprising because they form nearly isolated uplifts 15-30 km in advance of the regional sharp increase in structural relief located at the Okerokovik monocline and the South 1002 fault system of Grow and others (Chapage NA, Figure NA1) in the southern part of the coastal plain.
The region over which there has been Cenozoic deformation in pre-Mississippian basement in the eastern 1002 area probably forms a northward-elongated zone that begins at the South 1002 fault system at the southeastern margin of the 1002 area and terminates at the leading edge of the Aurora dome in the vicinity of the Beaufort Sea coast.
On the west side of this zone, Grow and others (Chapage NA) have described a detachment that descends eastward into the core of the zone to a depth of over 10.7 km (35,000 ft).
On the east flank of the zone are westward-descending detachments that are visible on seismic records to depths of 26,000 ft (Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA4).
These observations suggest that the detachment beneath the northward-elongate zone of basement-involved deformation forms a scoop-shaped trough that is bounded on its sides by lateral ramps.
The cross section discussed in this paper models a profile along the approximate axis of this trough of basement-involved deformation.
The factors that have led to the development of a northward-trending fairway for Cenozoic deformation in the pre-Mississippian rocks in the eastern 1002 area are unknown.
Possibly, a preexisting zone of structural weakness was present in the pre-Mississippian basement and was excavated by the Cenozoic deformation.
Such a zone of north-south weakness may have been produced by the Ellesmerian orogenic event in the lower Paleozoic, or possibly during opening of the Canada basin in the Early Cretaceous, particularly if opening was by rotation centered in the McKenzie delta, located only a short distance away to the east.
However, the structural grain of pre-Mississippian rock units in the subsurface of the coastal plain is interpreted by Kelley (Chapage BR) to trend east-west, normal to the trend of the fairway and thus argues against such a relation.
Alternatively, Wallace and Hanks (1990) have argued that the Okpilak batholith to the west of the fairway may have served as an obstacle to the northward progress of deformation.
This suggests that the batholith may have provided a strain shadow to deformation of pre-Mississippian rocks under the coastal plain in the vicinity of the Hula Hula low (see Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA1 for location), thus impeding deformation of pre-Mississippian basement rocks.
In this view, the absence of basement deformation in the Hula Hula low represents the regional anomaly in the northward extent of deformation of basement rocks rather than the presence of the northward outliers of basement-involved structures at Aurora dome and Niguanak high as discussed above.
While the alternative of Wallace and Hanks (1990) has many compelling aspects, it does not provide a reason for the eastward termination of the basement culminations against the undeformed pre-Mississippian basement in the Demarcation subbasin to the east (Figure BC2; Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA1).
A third alternative, the possibility that the depth to detachment may have been influenced by the thickness of overlying stratigraphic section at the time of the deformation, is suggested here.
Examination of seismic records in the 1002 area suggests that the maximum thickness of the Jago River Formation, estimated here to be nearly 5 km, may be located along the southeastern margin of the 1002 area.
If the Jago River Formation and its correlatives form a regionally significant fluvial-deltaic complex as argued in this paper, it is possible that the Jago River Formation was a major point for debauchment of sediment in the Paleocene and built a delta northward into a marine basin.
It is suggested that this delta may have provided a significant structural load not present to the east or west along strike.
The structural load, particularly after thickening during the initial phase thinskinned deformation in the Paleocene, may have driven the basal detachment of the thrust-belt to a locally deeper level as a function of the thickness of the structural wedge and allowed it to advance northward beyond the regional limit of basement-involved deformation that was present in the early Tertiary.
The balanced cross section presented in Plate BC1 is a well constrained integrative model that offers very specific predictions of the geology under the coastal plain that have applications to assessment of oil and gas potential.
For example, the model suggests that parts of the Ellesmerian section, the major petroleum reservoir at Prudhoe Bay, may be present on the south flank of the Niguanak high.
Depending on how much section was eroded by the LCU from the top of the Ellesmerian, the Sadlerochit Group, including possibly coarse-grained facies analogous to the Ivishak, may still be preserved in this area.
Due to onlap at the base Ellesmerian sequence, however, it is hypothesized that the Lisburne Group may consist of nearshore facies and that the Endicott Group probably is not present.
Erosion of the Ellesmerian sequence by the LCU, coupled with the southward dip on the flank of the Niguanak high, nonetheless may provide a stratigraphic trap analogous to the one in the Prudhoe Bay field if reservoir units in the Sadlerochit and Lisburne are preserved beneath the unconformity.
Second, it is suggested that erosion on the LCU in the late Neocomian, interpreted to have occurred along the transect north of approximately km 55 on Plate BC1 (cross section A), allows the possibility that clean sandstone reservoirs such as that in the Kuparuk C interval in the Kuparuk River field, might be present.
These reservoir units would be expected to form local accumulations just above the unconformity and could be distributed discontinuously over its entire extent.
Third, the large thickness of the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene deltaic depositional system proposed here allows the possibility that significant reservoirs may be present in the Brookian sequence.
The relatively simple deformational style modeled here provides hope that any reservoirs present in these rocks remain unbreached by deformation.
Because the shelf-slope transition for Paleocene rocks is hypothesized to be located in the vicinity of the Aichilik high, the most likely Brookian plays in Paleocene rocks in the 1002 area are suggested to be toe-of-slope turbidite mounds.
Nonetheless, the lithic character of these sandstones might remain impediments to reservoir quality.
Finally, there is a possibility that oil generated in the Tertiary strata of the Beaufortian sequence and/or the Hue Shale in the Demarcation subbasin to the east or the Barter subbasin to the north (Bird Chapage GG, Plate GG1), may have migrated up dip into the Jago ridge and/or Aurora dome structures.
Oil seeps at Angun Point and Cape Manning (Figure BC2) may substantiate the possibility of this petroleum system.
The impact of the timing of deformation on hydrocarbon generation and migration in the play concepts mentioned above is variable.
The Ellesmerian strata probably had a shallow initial southward dip during the time of maximum burial and hydrocarbon generation in Shublik and Hue Shale source rocks that lay in the oil window in the area of the present Brooks Range prior to deformation in the Paleocene.
Any reservoir facies present in the Ellesmerian sequence in the Niguanak-high area (e.g., Lisburne, Sadlerochit, Kemik Sandstone-like units) may have formed stratigraphic traps that could have been filled by northward migration of hydrocarbons prior to the deformation.
Thrusting and southward tilting of the Niguanak-dome horse in the Miocene, although well after the time of maximum burial and hydrocarbon generation, may have served to increase the trap size and concentrate petroleum accumulations.
However, any thrusting along faults that acted as basal detachments to thinskinned structures or roof thrusts associated with formation of the Niguanak high and Aurora dome at the top of the pre-Mississippian section may have caused breaching of the trap seals and spillage of any preexisting hydrocarbon accumulations.
Likewise, deformation is likely to have had only a degrading effect on any petroleum accumulations present in stratigraphic traps in the Brookian sequence that may have been filled with hydrocarbons generated from Shublik and Hue Shale source rocks from the south.
The deformation, on the other hand, could have enhanced hydrocarbon migration from Beaufortian and Hue Shale source rocks located in the oil window in the Barter and Demarcation subbasins during the Tertiary by creation of structural relief, migration pathways, and structural traps in the frontal zone of the thinskinned foldbelt (i.e., Jago ridge).
In sum, the model suggests that the oil and gas resources, particularly on the south flank of the Niguanak high, may be significant.
Questions, however, about the northward extent of the Ellesmerian sequence, the presence or absence of the LCU, reservoir quality, the timing of deformation, and effect of deformation on preexisting hydrocarbon accumulations caused a high level of risk to be assigned to hydrocarbon plays in the Niguanak and Aurora dome structures (Grow and others, Chapage P10).
