The Lewis Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50220261) includes strata of the Lewis Shale and the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone.
The distribution of existing producing wells in the Lewis Shale TPS in the San Juan Basin is related to two factors: 1. the distribution of subsurface shoreface para- sequences and distal equivalents in the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues and the four informal intervals of the Lewis Shale and 2. the preexisting wells completed in the Mesaverde below the Lewis Shale.
The sandstones of the La Ventana Tongue produce gas in a small area in the southeast part of the SJB and from more distal equivalents of the uppermost parasequences in the central part of the SJB.
The small area is part of a northwesttrending belt on the southwest side of the SJB (figure 6) where the La Ventana occurs in the subsurface (see for example, Fassett, 1977).
The Chacra produces gas from shoreface sands that exist in a northwest-trending belt in the subsurface.
In contrast, the present distribution of producing wells in the Lewis Shale is, at least for the time being, related to the distribution of preexisting Mesaverde wells that are being recompleted in the Lewis, primarily by Burlington Resources.
Similar productive facies in the Lewis Shale probably exist anyplace in the Lewis where sandy and silty interbeds were deposited that are susceptible to either natural or artificially induced fracturing and where they are adjacent to hydrocarbon source rocks.
In the farthest northeast portion of the SJB, no production is presently known from the Lewis Shale north of the small anticline in the deepest part of the SJB.
Limited data from individual wells and an examination of cumulative water production from wells in the database (IHS, 2000a,b) indicate that distal very fine grained sandstones and siltstones within the Lewis Shale may be too “tight,” that is they lack sufficient permeability to produce gas in that area.
In addition, previous publications indicate that gas-bearing sandstones in the SJB are water saturated updip on the basin margins, forming part of the trapping mechanism for the basin-centered gas (Masters, 1979).
Examination of the cumulative water production from wells producing gas from the Chacra sandstones, for example, indicate that water production within individual wells increases to the southwest of the Chacra producing trend, corroborating the interpretation that water saturation of those sandstones increases toward the southwest basin margin.
Thus, production of gas from the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues and the Lewis Shale appears to be limited to the southwest by water saturation of the updip sandstones.
Toward the other margins of the basin, production appears to be limited by a combination of water saturation in the sandstones and lack of permeability and porosity in the finer-grained distal sandstones and siltstones within the Lewis Shale.
Coupled with this understanding of the geologic controls on the distribution of known production in the assessment unit, GIS techniques again were used to define the minimum, median, and maximum untested areas of the assessment unit that have potential for additions to reserves in the next 30 years.
The maximum untested area (figure 6) was determined to include the area of La Ventana production farthest to the southwest and follows the depositional strike of the shoreface sandstones of the La Ventana to the northwest.
In the northwest, northeast, and southwest margins of the basin, the maximum area was determined based on the presumed updip limit of water saturation that limits gas production in the underlying Mesaverde rocks on the basin margin, based on the distribution of Mesaverde producing wells.
The maximum percentage of the untested assessment unit area that has potential for addition to reserves is 40 percent.
The median area was determined to include all wells to the southwest that produced from the Chacra, including those wells that have smaller total gas production and higher water production than most wells in the northwest-trending depositional facies trend of shoreface sandstones in the Chacra Tongue (figure 6).
To the northwest, northeast, and southeast the median area was determined along the structural contour on the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed that marks the presumed limit of the majority of producing wells in the Chacra.
This line was determined on the premise that Chacra gas production is in part limited by depositional facies and updip water saturation in the Chacra Tongue.
The median percentage of the untested area that has potential for addition to reserves is 34 percent.
The minimum area (figure 6) was determined to encircle the tight distribution of Chacra production on the southwest basin margin that appears to be controlled by the depositional strike of the shoreface sandstones and the updip limit of significant gas production imposed by water saturation within the updip rocks.
To the northeast, the minimum area line was determined along the axis of the small anticline that also marks the northeast limit of significant gas production in Mesaverde wells (figure 3A).
Presumably the lack of porosity and permeability coupled with updip water saturation limits Mesaverde production in this direction and would limit Lewis Shale production as well.
On the southeast and northeast basin margins, the minimum area line was determined to include all known Lewis and Mesaverde producing wells because Mesaverde exploration over the last few decades has apparently delimited the extent of productive rocks in these areas based on water saturation in the updip basin margins.
The minimum percentage of the untested area that has potential for addition to reserves is 23 percent.
The results of the assessment of undiscovered gas resources in the Lewis Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50220261) are presented in appendix B. Allocations of those resources to State and various Federal lands are in appendix A. The Monte Carlo simulations, verified by the analytical probability method, provide the following results for the assessment unit.
In the Lewis Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50220261), for continuous gas resources, there is an F95 of 8,315.22 BCFG and an F5 of 12,282.31 BCFG, with a mean value of 10,177.24 BCFG.
There is an F95 of 18.08 MMBNGL and an F5 of 47.32 MMBNGL, with a mean of 30.53 MMBNGL.
