The distribution and thickness of the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene Jago River Formation are critical factors used in this paper for reconstructing deformation of Brookian strata.
The Jago River Formation, defined in outcrop 27 km west of the transect (Buckingham, 1987), forms topset strata that are very well imaged in the Sabbath Creek syncline in seismic line 85­50 (Plate BC1, cross section A).
The Jago River Formation could be regarded as allochthonous or an erosional remnant of a local basin (Molenaar and others, 1987), but proprietary shot-hole paleontologic data indicate that latest Cretaceous and Paleocene deposits are widespread above the southern flank of the Niguanak high.
Because seismic reflectors in this area are incoherent and not as reflective as in the Sabbath Creek syncline, I hypothesize that the topset strata in the Jago River Formation give way northward into correlative clinoform deposits that extend northward to the area of mapped outcrops of Hue Shale above the Niguanak high (Figure BC2; see also Bird, Chapage GG, Plate GG1).
The clinoform deposits might be expected to be more shale-rich, more susceptible to small-scale structural disruption, and hence to be less reflective than the topset beds to the south.
Unfortunately, the transition from topset to clinoform reflectors is not evident in the seismic data and likely was located in Brookian strata eroded from the southern flank of the Niguanak high.
The minimum measured thickness of the Jago River Formation in the Sabbath Creek syncline is over 2.8 km (Buckingham, 1987) and nearly 3.5 km can be estimated in the core of the syncline from seismic data along the transect.
Vitrinite reflectance data from exposed rocks in the Sabbath Creek syncline indicate that another 2 km of strata once covered the syncline, but have been eroded away.
Some of the latter might have been syndeformational deposits correlative with the piggyback basin deposits reported to the east (Potter and others, Chapage BD; Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA2), but syndeformational strata are not evident in seismic line 85-50 and adjacent lines to the west.
From regional interpretation of thermal data discussed in a following section, a thickness of about 4.5 km is inferred for the Jago River Formation in the area of the Sabbath Creek syncline in Plate BC1.
This thickness constitutes nearly the entire thickness of strata allowed by the observed relations in the area.
The thickness of the unit must decrease substantially northward, however, to a maximum of about 2-2.5 km in rocks near the crest of the Niguanak high on the basis of estimates of maximum depth of burial from vitrinite reflectance data and fission-track data (O’Sullivan and others, 1993).
Additional northward thinning is indicated by the 550-m thickness of Paleocene strata reported from the Aurora well on the Beaufort shelf.
Such abrupt northward depositional thinning is consistent with a regional transition from topset strata to clinoform and basinal strata in a northward prograding depositional system and is comparable in scale and amount of thinning to the depositional wedge of Paleocene deposits present west of the Canning River (Bird, Chapage GG, Plate GG3).
Using the thicknesses estimated from the observations described above, a model is constructed in Plate BC1 (cross section A) that portrays the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene strata as a deformed, northward thinning wedge of progradational deltaic strata.
Using fault-bend fold geometry, the southernmost antiform in the Aichilik high north of the Sabbath Creek syncline is modeled as a horse composed of latest Cretaceous and Paleocene strata that was displaced about 7-8 km.
Initial cutoff angles of 30° were assumed for ramps in these thick units.
The thrust along which the displacement occurred has not been identified in outcrop and is predicted to be present in an area lacking bedrock exposures.
An alternate interpretation for the rocks coring the antiform that comprises the Aichilik high east of the transect is proposed by Potter and others (Chapage BD, Plate BD3).
They suggest that mud-rich rocks coring the antiform comprise an imbricate stack of Lower Cretaceous strata (pebble shale unit and Hue Shale).
Their interpretation of the units coring the antiform is not preferred in this paper because of (1) an excessive amount of shortening relative to overlying Tertiary deposits is implied by construction of the Aichilik high with these thin units, and (2) available paleontologic data do not demonstrate the presence of Lower Cretaceous rocks at the surface in the vicinity of the Aichilik high and/or related structures to the west in the vicinity of the line of section discussed here.
Potter and others (Chapage BD) additionally suggest that the Aichilik antiform represent a triangle zone with a roof thrust at the base of the Jago River unit.
Although the seismic data convincingly support a triangle-zone or passive-roof duplex geometry for this part of the Aichilik high, it is unclear if this geometry should be projected into the line of section because (1) northward dips indicative of a passive-roof are not evident in seismic profile 85-50, and (2) the antiform that composes the Aichilik high where investigated by Potter and others (Chapage BD) appears to terminate east of the line of section and be replaced by different structures that do not display this geometry.
Because seismically welldefined triangle zones in the southeastern part of the 1002 area seem to be located beneath the thick and competent topset strata of the Jago River unit, it is possible that passive-roof duplex geometry is replaced by other geometries where the facies of the Jago River Formation change from competent topset strata to less competent clinoform deposits.
Because the outcrops of Kingak through Hue Shale in the area above the Niguanak high lie at a high structural level, they must have been emplaced as the result of significant northward displacement (Molenaar and others, 1987).
Although poorly exposed, the outcrop patterns and shot-hole paleontologic data suggest that the Kingak forms the core of a small anticline (Bird, Chapage GG, Plate GG1) beneath the pebble shale unit, Hue Shale, and overlying latest Cretaceous and Paleocene deposits in this area.
The distribution of outcrops shown in Bird (Chapage GG, Plate GG1) and proprietary shot-hole paleontologic data suggest that a second small anticline cored at the surface by Hue Shale may be present south of the outcrops of the Kingak Shale on the Jago River.
In Plate BC1, these exposures are modeled as the basal part of a thick, duplicated section composed of Kingak through Paleocene deposits with the surface folds cored by Kingak and Hue Shale indicating the position of hangingwall cutoffs.
An initial cutoff angle of 30° is assumed for this fault in Plate BC1.
The location to which the Kingak and Hue Shale are restored is uncertain, but is guided by (1) the estimated thickness of latest Cretaceous and Paleocene strata and (2) the general, gentle average southward dip of reflections in Brookian strata on the south flank of the Niguanak high.
The southward-dipping reflectors approximate the shallow dip of the top of pre-Mississippian rocks on the south flank of the Niguanak high, suggesting that tilting was caused by relatively younger uplift of the underlying Niguanak structural high.
This interpretation would also suggest that the stratigraphic section beneath the Kingak thrust remains relatively intact.
These considerations suggest that the duplicated section underlain by the Kingak should be restored to a position near km 54 (Plate BC1, cross section A), indicating over 20 km of northward displacement on the underlying thrust.
Interestingly, the restored position of the Kingak outcrops approximates the southern limit of the area where downward cutting by the LCU is proposed on the south flank of the Niguanak high from stratigraphic observations (see Stratigraphy, above).
It is possible that the relatively large amount of northward displacement on this structure could have been related to northward truncation of the Kingak by the LCU, causing displacement on the Kingak detachment to migrate to a higher structural level by cutting through the entire Cretaceous and Paleocene section.
A similar large-displacement thrust has been proposed for the northeastern Sadlerochit Mountains, where truncation of the Kingak by the LCU apparently led to development of an allochthon composed of the Kingak Shale and Kemik Sandstone with at least 10 km of displacement (Mull, 1987; Kelley and Foland, 1987; W.K. Wallace, oral comm., 1999).
An alternate interpretation for the thinskinned structures above the southern flank of the Niguanak high is presented by Potter and others (Chapage BD).
They interpret discordances evident in the seismic data as indicative of an imbricate fan composed of thrust slices of Triassic to Cretaceous rocks (Sadlerochit Group to Hue Shale) (Potter and others, Chapage BD, Plate BD3; see also Bruns and others, 1987).
This geometry implies a significantly larger amount of shortening than does the model presented in this paper.
The discordances interpreted by Potter and others (Chapage BD) as long, south-dipping thrust faults are here attributed instead to local small-scale folds and faults within the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene section and to stratigraphic features such as clinoform reflections, submarine channels and channel fill, submarine landslides, and toe-of-slope turbidite mounds that are common in strata deposited in the prodelta slope environment inferred for these rocks.
The relations in Brookian strata north of the Niguanak high in the Jago ridge structure are more difficult to constrain.
The interpretation presented in Plate BC1 portrays the relations in this area as a triangle zone developed beneath a roof thrust at the base of Eocene strata on the northern flank of the Niguanak high and over the Aurora dome.
This interpretation is supported by: (1) outcrop data along the Jago River (Figure BC2) that indicate that Eocene deposits dip northward above strongly deformed Jurassic to Paleocene deposits (e.g., Molenaar and others, 1987); (2) shot-hole and outcrop paleontologic data that suggest that Eocene deposits lie north of older strata on a single, regional discordant bounding surface (Figure BC2), (3) seismic data that show a moderate north dip for Eocene strata outside the transect (Potter and others, Chapage BD, Figure BD3); and (4) magnetic data that indicate magnetically distinct units form the core and roof of the structure and show that strata forming the roof dip moderately northward (Phillips, Chapage AM, Figure AM10).
Accordingly, duplicated sections of Hue Shale and overlying latest Cretaceous and Paleocene deposits that form the core of Jago ridge are shown as composing the triangle zone below a roof thrust at the base of the Eocene strata.
The amount of shortening illustrated in Plate BC1 (about 5 km) in the triangle zone is constrained only by inferences about the thickness of the duplicated Cretaceous to Paleocene section and by the structural position of the roof thrust from seismic data and is here regarded as a conservative but only schematic estimate.
The roof thrust of the triangle zone is shown to root northward at the top of pre-Mississippian basement beneath highly reflective Beaufortian deposits under the Beaufort shelf.
This configuration is proposed because of a prominent north-dipping discordance present at a depth of about 6 km in the highly reflective strata in seismic line 84-40.
The large thickness of Beaufortian strata in this area is explained as a section duplicated by the south-vergent thrust that forms the roof thrust of the triangle zone (Plate BC1, cross section A).
Potter and others (Chapage BD) suggest that east of this transect, the triangle zone forming the northern flank of Jago ridge terminates within Paleocene strata instead of Beaufortian strata.
The configuration of Potter and others (Chapage BD) is generally consistent with the interpretation presented here (although they use the paleontologic interpretations of Poag (Chapage BI) for the Aurora well, which results in a thicker Paleocene section) and the difference in the northward termination of the structure may be the result of a local change in the detachment level of the floor thrust for the triangle zone.
Unfortunately, critical seismic data that would confirm this explanation are not presently available.
