Because of the poor exposures, lack of marker beds, poor age control, poor stratigraphic control, and complex deformation in the Brookian sequence beneath the coastal plain, the configuration for Brookian deposits shown in Plate BC1 (cross section A) is based on a series of inferences detailed below about Brookian stratigraphy, thickness of units, and deformational style.
Although all of the various units shown for the Brookian in Plate BC1 are balanced using line-length and area methods, the deformational model presented here should be regarded as only schematic.
Nonetheless, the model outlines a geometrically constrained structural solution that explains most of the known relations along the transect and offers testable hypotheses for future investigations as well as a model for oil and gas assessments.
The Kingak Shale at the top of the Ellesmerian sequence is postulated to have acted as the basal detachment for deformation of the Brookian sequence.
This interpretation is supported by (1) its position as roof thrust for Ellesmerian structures at Leffingwell Ridge and regionally elsewhere in the northeastern Brooks Range (e.g., Wallace and Hanks, 1990); (2) the Kingak is strongly deformed and exhibits markedly disharmonic deformation in exposures on the Aichilik River (Schenk and others, Chapage FS, Figure FS25); (3) the Kingak Shale is the oldest unit exposed in the coastal plain, indicating that thrusts must be rooted at or below this unit; and (4) discordant reflectors are common in the Kingak interval in seismic reflection profiles in the southern part of the coastal plain.
If the Kingak is not present to the north because of erosion on the LCU as hypothesized in this paper, the basal detachment likely steps up to the base of the overlying pebble shale unit, Hue Shale, or possibly to the base of the Jago River unit, indicated by discordances in strata above the top of seismic basement over the Niguanak high.
The oldest and structurally lowest Brookian unit modeled in Plate BC1 (cross section A) is the Arctic Creek unit.
This unit consists of thin-bedded turbidites that are interpreted to be the distal equivalents of middle and Upper Cretaceous turbidites deposited in the axis of the Colville basin to the south (e.g., the Bathtub Graywacke and Colville Group; Mull and Decker, 1993).
In its type area west of the transect, the Arctic Creek unit comprises a series of imbricated units on the order of 1 km thick (Mull and Decker, 1993).
Although poorly exposed, a shallow-dipping outlier of Kingak Shale is exposed apparently above the Arctic Creek unit near the Okerokovik River, about 18 km west of the transect (Figure BC2; see also Bird, Chapage GG, Plate GG1).
This geometry is here interpreted to indicate that the outlier represents a klippe of Kingak Shale that was thrust onto underlying deposits of the Arctic Creek unit.
The klippe of Kingak may indicate that the Arctic Creek unit consists of a series of horses in a duplex with a floor thrust in the Kingak.
A roof thrust for this duplex is probably located at the base of the overlying Jago River Formation, because: (1) tight, overturned folds are found at the base of the Jago River Formation at VABM Bitty on Sabbath Creek (Schenk and others, Chapage FS, Figure FS18; for location, see Figure BC2), (2) discordant reflectors are visible at the base of the Jago River Formation on many seismic lines, and (3) the Jago River Formation is a thick, competent structural unit that would deform differently than the less competent Arctic Creek unit.
A conservative model for duplex-related shortening of the Arctic Creek unit between a floor thrust in the Kingak and a roof thrust at the Jago River Formation is shown on Plate BC1.
Although balanced for bed length and area using initial cutoff angles of 20°, 15°, and 10° based on assumptions of decreasing thickness and grain size, critical observations about the position(s) of the hypothesized thrusts and cutoff angles are lacking and the model should be regarded as only schematic.
An important observation, however, is that the upper and lower limits of the units that bound the Arctic Creek unit can serve as constraints on its configuration.
These data indicate that the structural thickness of the Arctic Creek unit decreases dramatically northward into the axis of the Sabbath Creek syncline.
Such thinning might be expected because stratigraphic relations suggest that the turbidite deposits of the Arctic Creek unit thin regionally northward into the basinal deposits represented by the Hue Shale.
The transition is here inferred to be located in the axial part of the Sabbath Creek syncline (poorly imaged in the seismic data), but instead could be present in the imbricated units portrayed schematically on the southern flank of the syncline.
Because of the dramatic northward thinning, the roof thrust for structural duplication in the Arctic Creek unit is arbitrarily terminated in the axis of the syncline and no internal deformation is shown in the Hue Shale north of this location.
It is possible that the Arctic Creek unit represents the leading edge of a triangle zone developed beneath latest Cretaceous and Paleocene strata in the early Tertiary.
