For reasons described above, the roof thrust that is present regionally in the Kayak Shale is hypothesized to terminate northward beneath Leffingwell Ridge.
North of that location the Ellesmerian sequence is likely pinned depositionally to underlying pre-Mississippian rocks and the two units have deformed together.
Restoration of the Ellesmerian rocks was therefore combined with that of the underlying pre-Mississippian rocks as discussed above.
South of the northward termination of the roof thrust at Leffingwell Ridge, the Ellesmerian sequence has been deformed above the detachment in the Kayak Shale, and therefore independently, of the duplex developed in the underlying pre-Mississippian rocks.
Unfortunately, because of erosion, exposures of the Ellesmerian sequence remain at only three locations along the transect and deformation in the unit cannot be restored in detail except locally.
Nonetheless, these exposures may be sufficient to constrain shortening in the Ellesmerian sequence as follows.
Hanks (1987, 1988, 1989, 1993), who investigated the Ellesmerian section in detail at Leffingwell Ridge, reported a thrust duplication involving much of the Ellesmerian sequence.
The duplication is indicated by a large klippe of Kayak Shale through Triassic Karen Creek Sandstone resting structurally on the Kingak Shale (see also Wallace and Hanks, 1990, Figure 11) (Figure BC2).
This klippe demonstrates that both the Kayak and Kingak acted as major detachment surfaces with shortening being accommodated by a duplex in the intervening section.
Assuming an initial cutoff angle for the duplex of 30° following Hanks (1990, 1993), the minimum amount of shortening necessary to explain the observed relations is about 3 km.
Because the detachment that serves as a roof thrust in the Kayak Shale is inferred to be pinned just north of this location, much of the displacement on the roof thrust may be backthrusting above the underlying duplex of pre-Mississippian rocks.
Although duplication of the Ellesmerian sequence is demonstrated to have occurred at Leffingwell Ridge, examination of the map of Reiser and others (1980) suggests that thrust duplication of Ellesmerian strata above the Aichilik River antiform may not be common.
At the Wall synform on the southern flank of the antiform, the Ellesmerian section is caught in a tight syncline with local out-of-syncline faults but without significant duplication of section by thrusting (Reiser and others, 1980).
Thus, the Ellesmerian section above the Aichilik River antiform is portrayed in Plate BC1 (cross section A) with just one thrust duplication: that at Leffingwell Ridge.
Additional displacement may expressed in this area, however, by detachment folding of the Ellesmerian sequence.
Detachment folds are evident at least locally in Hanks (1993, Figure 7) but the shortening produced by these folds is difficult to evaluate without information on their amplitude and geometry.
For this reason, no attempt was made to portray detachment folds on Plate BC1 and no estimate is made of the amount of shortening represented by these structures.
In the north limb of Bathtub syncline, the Ellesmerian sequence displays evidence of significant amounts of shortening.
Assuming an average moderate south dip of 25°, exposures of carbonate rocks of the Lisburne Group as mapped by Reiser and others (1980) on the north flank of the syncline require a thicker section than that measured for the Lisburne Group in the area (Table 1).
However, the position of the contacts does not allow for complete duplication of the section.
Wallace (1989; written comm., 1999), suggests that shortening there is by asymmetrical detachment folding and minor thrusting of the Lisburne Groupage Because available maps do not display these structures, shortening of the Lisburne Group on the north flank of the syncline is approximated on Plate BC1 as a duplex with a floor thrust in the Kayak Shale and a roof thrust near the base of the Sadlerochit Group on Plate BC1 (cross section A).
The Sadlerochit Group and overlying sedimentary rocks consist of fine-grained distal deposits in this area.
They are portrayed as structurally thickened on Plate BC1 and were restored by area balancing only.
About 5.5 km of displacement on the top of the Lisburne Group is necessary to explain the relations in this area.
Structures on the south flank of the Bathtub syncline lie south of the Continental Divide thrust front of Wallace and Hanks (1990), which is marked by the axial trace of the Bathtub syncline.
Structures deforming the Ellesmerian section on the southern flank of the syncline are characterized by thrust-truncated detachment folds that have higher displacement than structures to the north and are transitional to the higher displacement structures of the older Brooks Range orogen to the south (Anderson, 1993; Homza, 1992; Homza and Wallace, 1991a,b; Wallace, 1988, written comm., 1999).
Deformation between the floor thrust in the Kayak Shale and roof thrust in the Kingak produced the Drain Creek duplex of Wallace and others (1988) (Figure BC2; Plate BC1, cross section A).
Based on examination of the map relations in Reiser and others (1980), deformation in the Drain Creek duplex is approximated as in Plate BC1 as an antiformal stack consisting of three duplications of the Ellesmerian sequence.
The three duplications are required to explain the structural relief in the area and represents a minimum displacement of about 11.5 km.
No attempt was made to model the uplifted pre-Mississippian rocks at the southernmost extreme of the section, which compose part of the regionally extensive Kongakut River thrust sheet of Wallace (1988).
The amount of shortening in the Ellesmerian sequence that once lay above the Mt. Greenough antiform cannot be directly estimated because of subsequent erosion.
However, if the Ellesmerian sequence is restored as described above and the Ellesmerian sequence is assumed to have once been continuous across the Mt Greenough and Achilik River antiforms without any additional duplication, the restored distance of Ellesmerian cover south of the pin at Leffingwell Ridge is nearly identical to the restored distance for underlying pre-Mississippian rocks over the same distance (Table 2, see below).
Because of the similarity of shortening between the pre-Mississippian rocks and their cover south of Leffingwell Ridge, no additional shortening was hypothesized for the Ellesmerian sequence in the eroded section that once lay above the two antiforms in Plate BC1.
Detachment folding in the Ellesmerian sequence is present along the west fork of the Aichilik River (Homza and Wallace, 1997) and may reasonably be inferred to have once extended eastward into the line section above the Mt. Greenough antiform (Hanks, 1993).
If this was the case, it would require that there be more shortening in the Ellesmerian sequence than modeled for the underlying pre-Mississippian rocks.
This relation suggests that some of the shortening of the Ellesmerian sequence in the south flank of Bathtub syncline may have been derived from south of the cross section.
