Thermal maturity of rocks at the surface increases southward across the 1002-area and into the Brooks Range.
Reflectance isograds show a general easterly trend similar to that of the mountain front.
Reflectance values range from less than 0.4-percent Ro in the northern half of the 1002 area to as much as 2.0-percent Ro in the south.
The zone of oil generation (0.6- to 1.3­percent Ro) occurs in a band three- to six-miles wide across the southern part of the 1002 area.
This part of the 1002 area and southward are considered prospective mostly for gas.
The southward increase in maturity is interpreted to reflect burial-heating and subsequent uplift and erosion.
Timing of structural deformation appears to have occurred after maximum heating.
Subsurface vitrinite data show that estimates of depth to the top of the oil window should be reasonably predicted in the 1002 area by using a thermal maturity coefficient of 2.7 x 10-5 ft-1 in combination with a known surface Ro value.
Within the oil window and below, the vitrinite reflectance gradient may increase.
Based on analysis of the Aurora well, the depth-range of the oil-generative section could vary by a factor of three—from as much as 12,000 ft with no gradient change, to as little as 4,000 ft with the increased gradient observed in the well.
It is postulated that overpressures produce a thermal-blanketing effect that results in the change in gradient.
If the hypothesis is correct, it becomes important to know the pressure regime in order to predict depths of hydrocarbon maturity zones and expected hydrocarbon phases.
The level of thermal maturity within petroleum accumulations near the 1002 area shows that most oil accumulations lie within or just above the uppermost part of the oil window.
Gas in the Kemik accumulation lies within the dry gas zone as expected.
The Point Thomson and Kavik accumulations seem anomalous given their hydrocarbon phases and maturity levels.
The anomalies may be the result of variations in source rock organic matter composition or migration of hydrocarbons from deeper, more mature horizons.
