The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) assessed the undiscovered oil and gas resources of the Black Warrior Basin Province in northeastern Mississippi and northwestern Alabama (figure 1).
This assessment is based on the geologic elements of each total petroleum system (TPS) defined in the province, including (1) hydrocarbon source rocks (source-rock maturation, and hydrocarbon generation and migration); (2) reservoir rocks (sequence stratigraphy and petrophysical properties); and hydrocarbon traps (trap formation and timing).
Using this geologic framework, the USGS defined two TPSs and three assessment units (AU) and estimated the volume of undiscovered oil and gas resources within each AU.
The two TPSs identified within the Black Warrior Basin Province are the Chattanooga Shale/Floyd Shale–Paleozoic TPS and the Pottsville Coal TPS (figure 2).
Two AUs were identified within the Chattanooga Shale/Floyd Shale−Paleozoic TPS: (1) Pre-Mississippian Carbonates AU, which is defined by gas trapped primarily in Cambrian and Ordovician platform-carbonate reservoirs by basement-controlled fault blocks; and (2) Carboniferous Sandstones AU, which is defined by gas and oil trapped in Upper Mississippian and Lower Pennsylvanian deltaic and shallow-marine sandstone reservoirs by a variety of basement-involved fault blocks, stratigraphic traps (sandstone to shale facies changes), and a combination of structural and stratigraphic traps.
The Pottsville Coal TPS contains the Black Warrior Basin AU, which is defined as the potential for gas having been generated and trapped in Lower and Middle Pennsylvanian coals, primarily in the Alabama portion of the Black Warrior Basin.
For the Black Warrior Basin Province, the USGS estimated means of 8,511 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG), 5.9 million barrels of oil (MMBO), and 7.6 million barrels of total natural gas liquids (MMBNGL).
Most (83 percent, or 7,056 BCFG) of the potential undiscovered gas resource is continuous (unconventional) coal-bed gas in the Pottsville Coal TPS (table 1).
Undiscovered conventional gas resources in the Chattanooga Shale/Floyd Shale–Paleozoic TPS are estimated to be about 1,455 BCFG at the mean, whereas undiscovered conventional oil resources within the Chattanooga Shale/Floyd Shale–Paleozoic TPS are estimated to be about 5.9 MMBO at the mean (table 1).
