The Kohat-Potwar geologic province depositional record is relatively complete from Late Proterozoic to Holocene (figure 5).
Late Proterozoic metamorphic basement rocks are overlain by oil-impregnated shales, sandstones, and interbedded carbonates and evaporates of the Late Proterozoic and Lower Cambrian Salt Range Formation.
The upper part of the Salt Range consists of thick carbonates overlain by evaporites marking the top of the formation.
Potential source beds and oil shows have been identified within the evaporite sections (Shah and others, 1977; Iqbal and Shah, 1980).
The thickness of the Salt Range Formation varies from 50 to more than 1,000 m, due partly to dissolution of these evaporates.
Above the Salt Range, evaporites are as much as 150 m of marine shales and massive sandstones representing braided-stream deposits of the Lower Cambrian Jhelum Group, Khewra Formation, which has produced oil at the Adhi, Chak Naurang, and Rajian fields (Khan and others, 1986; Petroconsultants, 1996) (figure 13).
As much as 180 m of the Kussak Formation glauconitic shoreface sandstones and siltstones overlie the Khewra.
The Kussak has produced oil at the Missa Keswal field (Petroconsultants, 1996).
The overlying Jutana Formation consists primarily of sandy carbonates and nearshore sandstones.
The Upper Cambrian Baghanwala Formation shales and interbedded sandstones in the Potwar Plateau and Salt Range area, and contemporaneous Khisor Formation salts in the Kohat area, mark the top of the Cambrian stratigraphic sequence.
The top of this sequence also marks the beginning of a hiatus that lasted until the Permian.
The Permian Nilawahan Group consists of the Tobra Formation glacial tillites, siltstones, and shales; the Dandot Formation alluvial or glacial coarse-grained sandstones and shales; the Warchha Formation coarse-grained argillaceous sandstones, and occasional shales; and the Sardhai Formation, which is similar to the Warchha except for a greater number of fine-grained-sandstone intervals (Shah and others, 1977; Iqbal and Shah, 1980; Kemal, 1992).
Three fields in the southeast portion of the Potwar Plateau have produced oil or gas from Tobra reservoirs.
Overlying the Nilawahan Group is the Zaluch Group consisting of Upper Permian Amb Formation shelf carbonates, Wargal Formation shelf-carbonate sequences, and the Chhidru Formation marls and coarsening upward sandstones.
The Wargal has produced oil at the Dhurnal field.
Although Mesozoic rocks are generally preserved in the Salt Range and southeast Potwar Basin, part or all of the section is missing from the Kohat Plateau and northwestern Potwar deformed zone (Jaswal and others, 1997).
Depositional thinning toward the west combined with erosion accounts for the missing rocks.
Overlying the Tredian are shelf carbonates of the Triassic Kingriali Formation.
The Triassic Formations were formerly referred to collectively as the Wulgai Formation (Shah and others, 1977).
The Jurassic strata include the Shirinab or Datta and Shinawari Formations consisting of nearshore variegated siliciclastics that contain some nonmarine-sandstone intervals (Khan and others, 1986).
The Datta has produced oil and gas from three fields, including Dhulian, in the northwest Potwar Plateau area.
Overlying these nearshore formations are as much as 900 m of Samana Suk Formation platform carbonates.
The Lower Cretaceous section consists of Chichali Formation basinal shales, Sembar and Lower Goru Formations coarsening-upward shoreline packages (late highstand), and Lumshiwal Formation sandstones.
The Upper Goru, Kawagarh, or upper Moghul Kot siliciclastics representing Late Cretaceous lowstand events are present southeast of the Salt Range and on the Kohat Plateau but are not reported within the Potwar Basin.
Cenozoic deposition began with the Paleocene-Eocene Makarwal Groupage Hangu Formation siliciclastics were deposited first on an erosional surface marking the top of the Cretaceous Lumshiwal Formation.
There is a transitional contact between the Hangu and Pab and the overlying Lockhart Formation carbonate-shelf system.
The contact between the Lockhart and the shallow-marine shales and subordinate carbonates of the Patala Formation is also transitional (Shah and others, 1977; Iqbal and Shah, 1980; Kemal, 1992).
Oil production has been attributed to the Lockhart and Patala.
The overlying Eocene Nammal and Panoba Formations are shallow-marine to lagoonal shales and interbedded limestones with a transitional contact between the Patala and the Nammal.
Overlying the Nammal and Panoba are the lower Eocene Sakesar or Margala Hill Formation marine limestones and shales.
Oil or gas production from eight fields spanning the Potwar Plateau are attributed to the Margala Hill.
Even though Iqbal and Shah (1980) indicated that the probably contemporaneous lower Eocene Bahadur Khel Salt is present only in the Kohat Plateau area (figure 5), oil or gas production at three fields on the Potwar Plateau has been attributed (Petroconsultants, 1996) to the Bahadur Khel Salt Formation (Shah and others, 1977; Petroconsultants, 1996).
The Chharat Group includes marine shales and interbedded limestones of the lower Eocene Chorgali Formation, the shales of the upper Eocene Kohat Formation, and the highstand shales and ramp carbonates of the Oligocene Kirthar Formation that were deposited at least in the Kohat and northern Potwar area.
Oligocene rocks are missing from most of the basin.
An erosional surface marks a change to alluvial environments represented by the Miocene to Pliocene Murree Formation fluvial sandstones and siltstones and the Kamlial Formation fluvial sandstones and clays of the Rawalpindi Groupage The Murree Formation contains the youngest reported oil-producing reservoirs in the Kohat-Potwar geologic province.
Pliocene and Pleistocene Siwalik Group fluvial sandstones and conglomerates mark the top of the stratigraphic column in the area.
