The Pottsville Coal Total Petroleum System (TPS) in the Black Warrior Basin of Alabama and Mississippi (figure 1) produces natural gas from coals in the Lower to Middle Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation.
The areal extent of the Pottsville Coal TPS (about 7,100 mi2, figure 1) is defined by the occurrence of coal in the upper part of the formation.
The Pottsville Coal TPS includes one continuous gas assessment unit, the Black Warrior Basin Assessment Unit (AU), which has the same boundaries.
Historical production data and the relation of this production to the basin’s geologic framework were used to estimate volumes of gas to be discovered in undrilled areas.
Geologic framework factors, considered in the estimation of undiscovered hydrocarbon resources of the Pottsville Coal TPS and the Black Warrior Basin AU, are shown in the petroleum system events chart in figure 2.
Source rocks for the gas accumulations in the Pottsville Coal TPS and the Black Warrior Basin AU are the Pottsville Formation coals, which also form the principal reservoirs.
Coal gas was generated primarily through thermal maturation of coal during the late Paleozoic.
Coal gases are characterized by having low gas wetness (median = 0.01 percent), low CO2 and N2 contents (medians = 0.08 percent and <0.01 percent, respectively), and relatively negative d13C1 (median = –47.4 parts per thousand PDB), the latter indicating that some of the gas formed from a late-stage microbial process.
Volumes of gas and water produced are dependent on well design and completion practices, well spacing, coal thickness, gas content (thermal maturity and coal chemical composition), and reservoir quality, which are determined by the abundance and openness of natural fractures, including cleats, joints, and fault-related shear fractures.
Virtually all coal-gas production from the Pottsville Formation is from high-volatile A bituminous or higher rank coals, which occur in areas of Tuscaloosa, Jefferson, and Walker Counties, Alabama, in the southeastern part of the Black Warrior Basin AU.
Through the first quarter of 2000, more than 3,500 gas wells had been completed within the Black Warrior Basin AU, of which about 3,200 were still producing.
Cumulative production through January 2003 was about 1.42 trillion cubic feet of gas (TCFG).
Our resource analysis resulted in estimated volumes of potential additions to reserves within the AU to be 4.61 TCFG at the 95-percent certainty level, 6.85 TCFG at the 50-percent certainty level, 10.18 TCFG at the 5-percent certainty level, and a mean resource estimate of 7.06 TCFG.
