The play is defined by probable hydrocarbon accumulations in highly imbricated fault traps related to the hanging wall of the Hogsback Thrust in both carbonate and clastic reservoirs of Paleozoic and Mesozoic age.
The play extends for 120 mi from the north flank of the Uinta Mountains northward to the west-east strike line of the Darby Thrust west of LaBarge, Wyo.
The width ranges from 12 to 15 mi from the toe of the Absaroka Thrust on the west, to the toe of the Hogsback Thrust, the eastern boundary of the province.
Data from the few discovered fields in the play indicate that reservoirs are mainly carbonate and sandstone rocks in the Devonian Darby Formation, Mississippian Madison Group, and the Pennsylvanian Amsden, Permian Phosphoria, and Triassic Thaynes Formations.
General estimated thicknesses of reservoir units vary widely from 130 ft in the Darby, to 8 to 10 ft zones in the Madison, 70 ft in the Amsden, 90 ft in the Phosphoria, and about 30 ft in the Thaynes.
Reservoir quality is estimated to be generally fair.
Cretaceous reservoirs (Frontier and Bear River Formations in the footwall) are mainly thinner sandstones interbedded with shale and are of fair quality.
Limited geochemical analyses suggest that hydrocarbon source rocks may be shale in the Amsden and Phosphoria in the hanging wall of the Hogsback Thrust in the central and northern area of the play, and footwall Cretaceous shale, especially in the southern portion of the play.
Analysis of samples in footwall Cretaceous shale, mainly in the Frontier, in a few deep wells indicates that catagenesis has advanced at least to the peak oil-generation stage in these rocks and has reached the dry gas phase in a number of places.
Analysis of footwall Frontier shale in the deepest and most southerly well in the play, at 18,400 ft, showed the kerogen in these rocks to be in the oil stage of catagenesis.
Based on the presence of noncommercial oil accumulations in two abandoned fields, Mill Creek and Christmas Creek, hydrocarbons were generated in these footwall Cretaceous shales and migrated along faults into Thaynes, Phosphoria, and Darby reservoirs in the hanging wall in Late Cretaceous-early Tertiary time.
Fair shows of gas and moderate gas recoveries from drill-stem tests (DST) are reported in the Triassic Thaynes and Phosphoria Formations, Weber Sandstone, and Madison Group (where oil was also swabbed) in wells drilled in the central and northern areas of the play.
Traps are in highly faulted, narrow anticlines and within sharply bounded splay faults in the hanging wall near the eastern edge of the Hogsback Thrust.
Scant information is available on trap geometry or amount of closure in discovered fields.
Seismic and well information indicates that the leading edge of the Hogsback Thrust is characterized by numerous imbricate faults that appear to limit traps to distinct zones within the imbricate faults.
This is typified by holes drilled in the vicinity of the one-well Horse Trap field (Amsden gas), where one of the drill holes cut 12 separate faults within a 4,800 ft interval in Paleozoic rocks.
Shale and anhydrite seals are present in both Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks, although the effectiveness of the seals may be lessened in places by excessive faulting.
Drilling depths will range from less than 6,000 to about 17,000 ft.
Exploration is minimal; about 30 scattered wells have been drilled in the play since the middle 1960's and only a very limited amount of seismic exploration took place in the northern half, although seismic coverage in the southern half of the play is nearly as dense as in the area of the Absaroka Thrust Play (3604).
Exploration to 1993 resulted in the discovery in the early 1980's of three one-well fields in four different-age reservoirs (all abandoned or shut-in as subcommercial)--Mill Creek, Horse Trap, and Christmas Creek.
Projected sizes of undiscovered accumulations are estimated to be in the small to medium size range; future potential for oil is moderate and for gas fair to good.
