History of Petroleum geology in Georgia can be divided into three parts: from Ancient times until 1929, 1929-1994 (“Georgian Oil” times) and from 1994 until present.
Those periods vary with both oil production methods and foundations achieved.
Existence of surface oil seeps in Georgia (Figure 1) has been known since Ancient times.
Multiple historical documents written by travelers of Middle Ages are found which include records of trading of oil produced in Georgia from both West and East parts of the country.
Those times the only way of producing was direct method, collecting from surface oil seeps or at most digging shallow pits.
These times as in most parts of the world no geological surveys were done.
Different local and foreign entities started their ventures in Georgia producing oil this way without doing any geological surveys.
First wells drilling started in the end of this period, which lasted until 1929 when The Trust “Georgian Oil” was established.
However, even these times oil was used not only for fuel and lighting, but also as lubricant and in medicine purposes.
In first half of XIX century oil was produced in Guria (west Georgia), Patara Shiraki and Eldari valley (southeast Georgia), Navtlugi (in Tbilisi surrounding) by digging shallow pits and wells around surface oil seeps, which collected oil from these seeps.
Oil drilling itself started in Georgia in 1869 by Walter Siemens, Prussian, who got license for Shiraki, Mirzaani and Eldari (southeast Georgia).
The first wells were 38, 18, 15 m deep and initially they were producing 10-17 bopd.
Soon oil production in southeast Georgia tripled up to 14,000 bbls of oil per year (from approximately 70 producing wells).
Then Siemens build two oil refineries and started production of petrol, gasoline, naphta, car oil and light oil.
Besides oil production with this method dropped to 8,000 bbls in 1890 Siemens’s experience was applied in all other oil producing regions of Georgia and his activity attracted more interest of Georgian, Russian and Armenian oil businessmen to Georgia.
That is why many new oil producer cooperations appeared throughout Georgia, however oil production had being remained in the same oldfashioned level and without realizing of geology of the areas and consequently oil production was dropping fast.
In 1928 Italian-Belgian mining consortium drilled first deep well (540 m), which flowed oil.
For petroleum exploration purposes, Soviet/Russian experience was applied, as it was soon understood, that geologically, Georgia been located just south of Greater Caucasus Mountains might have a very similar composition to wellknown Russian oil fields in Northern Caucasus.
Georgia is squeezed between two major orogenic systems: Greater Caucasus (which divides Georgia from Russia/ North Caucasus) and Lesser Caucasus.
Between those mountains, the same sedimentary formations are existent which form petroleum systems of the Northern Caucasus.
For source rocks Maikop (Oligocene-Lower Miocene), Upper Eocene and were considered (now Lower Jurassic shales are becoming actual), while Middle Eocene fractured volcanic tuffs, Cretaceous dolomitized limestones and Chokrakian (Middle Miocene) and Upper Eocene sandstones are major productive reservoir rocks.
One of the first oilfield developed by Georgian Oil was Mirzaani, which is located in southeast region of Georgia.
It was this field where first deep (540 m) exploration well was drilled which flowed oil.
In next two decades more than 200 production wells were drilled, productive zones thickness was identified, which is up to 30-40 m.
Mostly oil was produced from 500-1200 depths and daily production varied from 4 to 100 bopd.
All producing wells initially flowed oil and after rate drop, they produced for decades with pumping.
Total production from Mirzaani field is 7.9 MMBbl.
Patara Shiraki low-rate field is located eastward from Mirzaani field and was brought to production in 1939 from 460-800 m depth.
First well there however was drilled in 1930-1932 which flowed commercial oil from 456 m depth.
Most of production in this field is related to two productive zones in Upper Miocene with 1.4-3.5 to 4-26 m thickness.
Total production however from this field is approximately 530,000 Bbls.
Norio oilfield (Figure 2) (northward close to Tbilisi capital city) also was found in 1939 and its adjusted Satskhenisi field was found in 1956.
These fields are characterized with high variation of initial rates, which is explained with low permeability numbers of reservoirs and fracture-based nature of oil flow.
Total produced oil from these fields is approximately 2.1 MMBbl.
1962 in Taribani (East Georgia) 3300 m well gave 700 bopd flow.
After that, more than 20 wells were drilled in the area only one reached 70 bopd production and several wells 7-14 bopd though, other wells giving only oil and gas shows.
Total production in Taribani is 570,000 Bbls.
In 1967 in Teleti area (southward close to Tbilisi) at 2712 m well #11 suddenly strong gas flow happened with initial gas rate of 250,000 m3 per day.
That was the first commercial production of gas in Georgia.
However, Teleti field dropped very fast and Teleti became only oil field.
Total production from Teleti field is 3.8 MMBbl.
During all these times oil had been produced only from Upper Eocene (Teleti), Oligocene (Satskhenisi), and Miocene reservoirs (Norio, Shiraki, Taribani, Mirzaani) which covers central and East Georgia, but exploration continued for Cretaceous which was famous reservoir in North Caucasus which produced over 2bn bbls with rate of 400,000 bopd.
In 1974 Cretaceous exploration drilling was running in Samgori-Patardzeuli area (southeast near Tbilisi), but accidentally biggest oil field of Georgia was found in Middle Eocene fractured volcanogenic reservoirs, which had never been considered as prospective zone in Georgia.
First commercial well #7 flowed 7,000 bopd.
Two hundred wells were drilled after this in Samgori-Patardzeuli reaching total production of 172 MMBbl.
Dimensions of the field are 24 km length and 2.5 km average width.
Initial production of many wells were over 3,500 bopd.
Average distance between wells 500-750 m.
Oil is of high quality, 0.825 g/cm3.
In the period of 1974-1984 Georgian, Oil has produced over 172 MMbbls of oil from Samgori-Patardzeuli Field with peak production reaching 70,000 bopd.
In early 90s after collapse of Soviet Union, the territory of Georgia (including offshore) was divided into small license blocks, which were taken by different junior exploration.
Around 15 companies were license owners in Georgia since 1994.
Currently nine companies are presented as the license holders under Production Sharing Agreements with the State, 90% of onshore Georgia been licensed for petroleum operations.
However all these companies produced less than 11 MMbbls of oil from already existing fields with current daily production of around 1,000 bopd.
Today having 5 oil fields and 18 sub-commercial discoveries (Figure 4) exploration of oil continues in three directions: a) looking for new prospective structures in already known petroleum systems including going offshore in Black sea, b) exploring Jurassic rocks source rock potential, which has never been explored yet having the excellent source rock as Maikop been heavily presented within the country; c) exploring Georgia’s shale oil and shale gas potential apart from conventional potential.
