The Norwegian Barents Sea was for some time considered a gas province due to significant uplift and owing to gas discoveries like the Alke, the Albatross and the Snøhvit fields, but the later to follow advents of the Goliat (2000) and Johan Castberg (2011) oil discoveries, followed by the Wisting and Gohta (2013) oil discoveries has resulted in renewed optimism and need for revision of the “Petroleum Systems Understanding” of the region.
The Mesozoic rocks having varying degree of reservoir quality are present in the Norwegian Barents Sea.
Residual oil saturation may exist in wells classified as dry, and petroleum inclusions can represent a further means of examination of palaeo-petroleum which existed previously in traps.
In this present study petroleum inclusions and residual oil in the core samples was investigated from three wells 7321/7-1, 8-1 and 9-1.
The maturity of the samples was calculated from GC-MS data where aromatic hydrocarbons and sterane isomers categorize the samples from well 7321/7-1 to have a higher maturity than bitumen form well 8-1, while the well 9-1 has a relatively lower maturation level, as shown in figure 3 A.
The ratios of steranes (20S+R and 22S+R), as used by Mackenzie (1984), indicate the extent of isomerization (figure 3 B).
The samples show that the bitumen is clearly fully mature and represent  mostly expulsion of petroleum at maturities  of the early to middle part of the oil window (=0.8 Ro %) which is positive to  future petroleum exploration in the region.
The gases from all the samples show Bernard parameter value less than 100 which clearly illustrate the thermogenic origin of gas (Bernard et al., 1977).
In the well 7321/7-1, two reservoir sections have different gas compositions signalizing different sub-reservoirs.
The Middle Jurassic reservoir (Stø Formation) contains C2+ wet gas components of hydrocarbons making up 14 to 19 % (Jamil, 2012), indicating clearly that a condensate to oil associated gas (Schoell, 1983) whereas the Middle Triassic Reservoir (Snadd Formation) in the well 7-1 represents dry themogenic methane gas of about 95 % (figure 4 B) (C2+ contents of only 5%) with an abnormally high butane and pentane isomers ratios which concludes the process of biodegradation.
This reservoir section also contains a rich polar fraction as shown in TLC-FID analyses that also support the model with in-reservoir biodegradation (Connan, 1984).
The Late Triassic reservoir unit (Fruholmen Formation) in the well 8-1 contain C2+ hydrocarbons ranges from 17 to 22 % (figure 4 B) showing that a condensate to oil associated gas existed at one time in the reservoir.
The well 7321/9-1 contain three reservoir units, the Late Jurassic (Fuglen Formation), the Middle Jurassic (Stø Formation) and the Middle Triassic (Snadd Formation), where all these sandstone units contain 14 to 19 % of C2+ hydrocarbons (figure 4 B) modified from Schoell (1983).
The reservoir units also contain normal butane (i-C4/n-C4) and pentane (i-C5/n-C5) isomers ratios (figure 4 A) which shows unaltered petreolum (Horstad et al., 1992).
The composition of the gas varies in the inclusions in the Middle Jurassic sandstone (Stø Formation) in wells 7-1 and 9-1 indicate the complexity of the Middle Jurassic reservoir in the Fingerdjupet Sub-Basin.
Several uplift and exhumation events in the Tertiary Period resulted in fracturing of the cap rocks on traps in the Barents Sea.
Additionally, the uplift exposed deeper stratigraphy at shallower levels which decreased the temperature and pressure resulting in gas expansion and phase separation (Sales, 1997).
This gas expansion and phase separation may have triggered dismigration of oil from most of traps in the region.
On the other hand, nonuniform stages of uplift in the basin differentially affected the sealing capacity and the dismigration.
The cap rock may in cases also leak or bleed off gas from the trap, while retaining some oil, and uplift may mobilize oil from deeper down in the migration avenues so that uplifted traps may recharge.
Thus, uplift is not necessarily only destructive to traps of the region (Ohm et al., 2008).
Conclusively, this study has found irrefutable proof of migrated gas and residual migrated oil in the three investigated wells and this shows that source rock units in the region generate the mature hydrocarbons that accumulate in multiple reservoir units of the Fingerdjupet Sub-basin.
