According to the sequential stages of burial, uplift, and erosion prescribed by this model, the thermal history of rocks in the southern part of the transect began with progressive heating in Early Cretaceous to Early Eocene time, followed by episodic cooling in the Middle Eocene and Oligocene, and possibly a third cooling episode in Miocene to Recent time.
The thermal history for the rocks in the northern part of the transect, i.e., north of the Marsh Creek anticline, is characterized by progressive heating from Early Cretaceous to Recent time.
Oil-prone source rocks in the Shublik Formation attained thermal maturity and began to generate oil in Late Cretaceous to Paleocene time, before the growth of the Brookian structures on this transect.
Regional southward flexure of the transect area at that time favored migration toward the north, i.e., toward the distal part of the foreland.
A small wedge of the Shublik Formation near its northern limit may have generated oil later, after the onset of deformation in the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains.
This oil may have migrated southward into the Shublik-Sadlerochit structural high-- a feature now breached by erosion.
Stratigraphically higher petroleum source rocks, i.e., in the Hue Shale and Canning Formation were not modeled in this study, but other studies show that these units generated oil after formation of structural traps associated with the Brookian orogeny.
Three main stratigraphic sequences are present in the northeastern Brooks Range and in the area of our transect: (1) the pre-Mississippian sequence, (2) the Ellesmerian sequence, and (3) the Brookian sequence (Plate SM1a, Figure SM3; Lerand, 1973; Grantz et al., 1975; Bird and Molenaar, 1987).
The boundaries between these sequences correspond approximately with two regional unconformities-- the sub-Mississippian unconformity (SMU), which separates the pre-Mississippian from the overlying Ellesmerian sequence, and the Lower Cretaceous unconformity (LCU), which occurs in the upper part of the Ellesmerian sequence near the base of the Brookian sequence.
The pre-Mississippian sequence includes all of the rocks that underlie the sub-Mississippian unconformity in the transect area.
It is often referred to as "basement" in this region, because it is generally more penetratively deformed than the overlying Ellesmerian sequence (Moore et al., 1994).
In the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains, however, competent units in the upper part of the sequence show remarkably little internal strain, unlike rocks of the pre-Mississippian sequence exposed elsewhere in the northeastern Brooks Range.
The structural geometry within the pre-Mississippian sequence is characterized by large-scale fault-bend folding that produces anticlinal uplifts in the Sadlerochit and Shublik Mountains and the area to the south (area A-D, Plate SM1), and a pattern of alternating synforms and antiforms in the subsurface to the north (area E-G, Plate SM1).
In the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains, the pre-Mississippian sequence is composed mainly of thick-bedded to massive carbonates of the Katakturuk Dolomite, Nanook Limestone, and Mount Copleston Limestone (Dutro, 1970; Blodgett et al., 1992; Figure SM2), which are thrust northward over Mississippian and younger rocks of the Ellesmerian sequence.
The basement carbonate units display an intact internal stratigraphy, although they are low-grade metamorphic rocks with a conodont alteration index (CAI) of about 4 (Dumoulin and Harris, 1994).
In limited areas in the northeastern Sadlerochit Mountains and northwestern Shublik Mountains the pre-Mississippian sequence also includes a poorly known basal unit composed mainly of metabasalt and meta-clastic rocks (unit "pCpu," Figure SM2).
The Katakturuk Dolomite is at least 2500 m thick and is thought to be Late Proterozoic in age based on the presence of stromatolites, the lack of shelly fossils, and its stratigraphic position beneath the Nanook Limestone, of mainly Lower Paleozoic age, and above metabasalt that yields radiometric dates of roughly 700 and 800 Ma (Clough et al., 1990).
The Katakturuk Dolomite has been subdivided into a number of map units, most of which are present in both the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains (Robinson et al, 1989).
To show this stratigraphy, we have grouped these internal units into lower, middle, and upper parts, designated "pCkI," "pCkII," and "pCkIII," respectively (Plate SM1; Figure SM3).
The Katakturuk Dolomite is overlain unconformably by about 1200 m of Upper Proterozoic to Ordovician Nanook and Lower Devonian Mount Copleston Limestone, designated "DOCn" on our map and section (Figure SM2, Plate SM1).
These rocks are separated from overlying Mississippian strata of the Ellesmerian sequence by the sub-Mississippian unconformity.
In the Sadlerochit and Shublik Mountains, the angular discordance across this unconformity ranges from 20 to 30 degrees, with the carbonate units of the pre-Mississippian sequence dipping to the south more steeply than the overlying Ellesmerian strata (Robinson et al, 1989).
South of the Shublik Mountains, the pre-Mississippian sequence is exposed in the Third and Fourth Ranges, at the southern end of our transect.
In the Fourth Range it consists of partly recrystallized black limestone and phyllite and contains the trace fossil Planolites (R.B. Blodgett, oral communication, 2/2/98).
Based on the presence of this trace fossil and the absence of shelly fossils, this unit is thought to be Upper Proterozoic and coeval with the unfossiliferous lower part of the Nanook Limestone (Blodgett, oral communication, 1998).
Following this correlation, we have designated a “Proterozoic to Lower Paleozoic?” unit in the upper part of the basement south of the Shublik Mountains (shown in medium gray, Plate SM1) to indicate rocks of similar age to the Katakturuk Sequence and Nanook Limestone.
Beneath the "Proterozoic to Lower Paleozoic?" unit we have inferred an older basement unit, designated "Proterozoic?” on Plate SM1.
This unit is meant to encompass all rocks that underlie the Katakturuk Dolomite, possibly including age-equivalents of the Neruokpuk Quartzite which is exposed 10 km south of our section (Reiser et al., 1971).
The “Proterozoic?” unit is not exposed in the area of our transect, so it should be considered speculative.
The nature of the basement north of the Sadlerochit Mountains is known from seismic lines AN84-6 and AN85-8 and, for the upper part of the basement, from exploratory wells in the area of Flaxman Island and the Canning River.
Lithologies reported in these wells include argillite, limestone, dolostone, quartzite, phyllite, and chert (Fisher and Bruns, 1987; Bird and Molenaar, 1987; Bird et al., 1987).
Recent, detailed studies of lithofacies in the wells at Flaxman Island and the adjacent islands to the west (Dumoulin, Chapage CC) indicate that the upper 400 m or so of the basement in that area is composed of an upper unit of sandstone and carbonate and a lower unit dominated by shale and siltstone.
Both the upper and lower units have dips of less than 15°.
The sandstones in the upper unit are not recrystallized, and the fine-grained rocks in the lower unit lack slaty cleavage, suggesting that the shallow part of the basement in this area has undergone less internal deformation than other parts of the pre-Mississippian sequence.
Fossil fragments in the upper unit include phosphatic brachiopods and pelmatozoan debris, indicating that these rocks are Cambrian or younger.
Based on these observations and on our seismic interpretation for the northern part of the cross-section, we have inferred a "Lower Paleozoic?" unit in the upper part of the basement in this area (Plate SM1).
