This area lies between the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska (NPRA) and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) and extends from the Brooks Range northward to the State-Federal offshore boundary.
Most commercial oil fields and virtually all petro­leum-producing infrastructure in northern Alaska are located within the assessment area.
This area, which consists mostly of State and Native lands covering about 23,000 square miles (59,500 km2), is maturely explored in the north but only lightly explored in the south.
Approximately 15 billion barrels of oil (including natural-gas liquids) have been produced from the assessment area (most from the giant Prudhoe Bay field), and remaining (discovered) reserves include about 7 billion barrels of oil and about 35 trillion cubic feet of natural gas.
The USGS estimated technically recoverable, undiscovered resources of oil, natural gas (nonassociated and associated), and natural-gas liquids (from nonassociated and associated gas) in the central North Slope assessment area.
Oil resources range between 2.6 and 5.9 billion barrels of oil (BBO) (95% and 5% probabilities), with a mean of 4.0 BBO.
Nonassociated gas resources range between 23.9 and 44.9 trillion cubic feet (TCF) (95% and 5% probabilities), with a mean of 33.3 TCF.
In addition, means of 4.2 TCF of associated gas, 387 million barrels of natural-gas liquids (MMBNGL) from nonassociated gas, and 91 MMBNGL from associated gas are estimated to occur (see table for estimates over a range of probability).
Nearly two-thirds of the mean undiscovered oil is estimated to occur in three plays in the northern part of the area—Brookian Clinoform, Brookian Topset, and Triassic Barrow Arch.
About half of the mean undiscovered nonassociated natural gas is estimated to occur in four plays in the southern part of the area—Brookian Clinoform, Thrust Belt Triangle Zone, Thrust Belt Lisburne, and Basement Involved Structural.
It is estimated that 91% of undiscovered oil resources occurs in accumulations of less than 250 million barrels of oil (MMBO) recoverable and that 96% of undiscovered nonassociated gas resources occurs in accumulations smaller than 3.0 TCF recoverable.
The occurrence of larger oil and gas accumulations is unlikely.
