The Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System extends across most of the Pelagian Province.
This system and corresponding assessment unit (Jurassic-Cretaceous Structural/Stratigraphic Assessment Unit, 20480201) generally coincide with the potential extent of petroleum migration from Jurassic and Cretaceous source rocks.
As mentioned previously, the Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene El Haria mudstone separates this total petroleum system from the overlying Tertiary total petroleum system.
Where the El Haria mudstone is absent in the southern part of the Pelagian Province, the total petroleum system boundary is approximated by the Cretaceous-Paleocene boundary.
Triassic evaporites and Lower Jurassic carbonate rocks separate this total petroleum system from any underlying systems.
An events chart (figure 11) summarizes the ages of source, reservoir, and seal rocks; the timing of trap development; and generation and migration of petroleum.
During the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous, faulting and strong local subsidence defined deepwater basins separated by uplifted fault blocks, which consisted of slope and carbonate platform deposits (Morgan and others, 1998).
The deepwater basins allowed deposition of organic-rich sediments and turbidite fan deposits (Bédir and others, 1992; Morgan and others, 1998).
Transpression and inversion during the Late Cretaceous and Paleogene caused uplift and erosion of carbonate platforms that formed previously along fault zones.
These strucural events, as well as more recent deformation, provided traps for petroleum accumulations (Bédir and others, 1992; Morgan and others, 1998).
Petroleum generation occurred throughout the Tertiary.
The primary source rocks are mudstone of the Jurassic Nara Formation, Lower Cretaceous M’Cherga Formation, Albian Lower Fahdene Formation, and Cenomanian to Turonian Bahloul Formation.
According to Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières (c. 1999), the Jurassic Nara Formation source rock exists in an elongated northwest to southeast trend from central Tunisia through the Gulf of Gabes and extending along the coast into Libya.
Cretaceous source rocks are present throughout much of the Pelagian Province, although the distribution of the Bahloul Formation is limited to an arcuate and elongate, northwest to southeast trend (figure 4).
Combined, one or more of the Jurassic and Cretaceous source rocks are present across most of the province.
Source rock properties are described by Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières (c. 1999) as follows: The Nara Formation source rocks are thin black mudstone with alternating limestone; approximately 80 m thick; contain as much as 2 percent TOC; maturation described as mature to late mature.
The M’Cherga Formation source rocks are light- to dark-gray calcareous and dolomitic mudstone containing type II kerogen; as much as 100 m thick; contain 0.2–3 percent TOC; maturation described as mature to late mature.
The Lower Fahdene Formation source rocks are dark pelagic marl with interbedded limestone containing type II and III kerogen; as much as 150 m thick; contain 0.5–3 percent TOC; maturation described as early mature to mature.
The Bahloul Formation source rocks are laminated black argillaceous limestone containing type II kerogen; approximately 20 m thick; contain as much as 14 percent TOC; maturation described as early mature to mature.
Oil generation from the Nara Formation probably began in the early Tertiary (figure 11), although generation may have begun as early as the Late Cretaceous in deeper basins (Bédir and others, 1992).
Peak petroleum generation of the other source rocks generally occurred during the Miocene to Pliocene (Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
Petroleum migrated vertically along faults and fractures, and laterally into adjacent reservoirs.
The API gravity of oil generated from the Jurassic and Cretaceous source rock ranges from 28º to 37º; the mean is 33º (Petroconsultants, 1996a; GeoMark, 1998).
The sulfur content ranges from 0.2 to 0.4 percent, with a mean of 0.3 percent (GeoMark, 1998).
Cretaceous and Cenozoic rocks make up most of the overburden.
As with the overlying Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System, overburden rocks are variable across the area (figure 5).
In addition to strata removed by erosion during the Cenozoic (previously described in the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System section), minor amounts of Lower Cretaceous and Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene rocks are also absent (figures 5B and 6).
Known reservoir rocks include: (1) Middle to Upper Jurassic Nara Formation dolomite or dolomitic limestone and M'Rabtine sandstone; (2) Lower Cretaceous Meloussi and Sidi Aïch sandstone and Orbata and Serdj carbonates; and (3) Upper Cretaceous Zebbag, Isis, and Bireno, Douleb, and Miskar carbonates and Abiod fractured chalk (table 2, figure 6). Figure 12 shows the distribution of Zebbag Formation reservoirs, as well as locations of fields having reported oil and gas volumes from reservoirs within the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System.
Most of the discovered oil volumes in this total petroleum system, as of 1996, appears to be in Lower Cretaceous Bireno (approximately 38 MMBO) and Jurassic (approximately 34 MMBO) reservoirs, whereas most of the discovered gas appears to be in Upper Cretaceous Abiod fractured reservoirs (approximately 1,000 BCFG).
Seals include Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous mudstone of the M’Cherga Formation; various Lower to Upper Cretaceous mudstone and carbonate rocks, including Aleg mudstone; and Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene El Haria mudstone (Macgregor and Moody, 1998; Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
As with the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System, trap types of known accumulations include fault blocks, low-amplitude anticlines, high-amplitude anticlines associated with reverse faults (inversion anticlines), wrench fault structures, and stratigraphic traps (figure 9A and B).
Volumetrically, most of the discovered oil in the Jurassic-Cretaceous Total Petroleum System appears to be in anticlinal traps, whereas most of the discovered gas appears to be in fault-related traps.
One assessment unit was identified for the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System, Jurassic-Cretaceous Structural/Stratigraphic Assessment Unit (20480201) (figure 3).
As of 1996, twenty-six fields reported petroleum volumes in reservoirs of the corresponding total petroleum system, and these fields are allocated to this assessment unit.
Of these discovered fields, 11 are oil fields, 6 are gas fields, and 9 fields are not classifed because they contain less than 1 MMBOE.
Combined, these fields contain 103 MMBO, 1,301 BCFG, and 23 MMBNGL, as known volumes (table 1) (Petroconsultants, 1996a).
Minimum field sizes of 1 MMBO and 6 BCFG were chosen for this assessment unit based on the field-size distribution of discovered fields.
At the end of 1995, the exploration density was approximately eight new-field wildcat wells per 10,000 km2.
Exploration activity has been variable through time and appears to be in an immature stage.
The overall success rate is approximately 14 discoveries per 100 new-field wildcat wells (or about one discovery per seven new-field wildcat wells).
As of 1996, offshore fields existed in water depths that range from about 5 to 82 m, averaging about 46 m.
The size and number of oil fields appear to have increased with respect to exploration activity, whereas trends for gas fields were not apparent.
Additionally, more recent oil field discoveries have been made at shallower depths.
Plots showing exploration activity and discovery history are presented in Appendix 2.
Exploration for structural and combination traps is expected to continue, resulting in the probable discovery of more fields, both oil and gas.
Discoveries in structural and stratigraphic traps involving Zebbag (and lateral equivalents), Douleb, and Abiod reservoirs will most likely continue as exploration progresses seaward into deeper water.
Some of these discoveries may be substantial.
More discoveries may also be made in Jurassic rocks, but these may be few and small due to the limited extent of mature source rocks and reservoirs.
This study estimates that about one-fourth of the total number of fields (discovered and undiscovered) of at least the minimum size has been discovered to date.
The estimated median size and number of undiscovered oil fields are 5 MMBO and 38 fields; the same values for undiscovered gas fields are 25 BCFG and 28 fields.
The ranges of number, size, and coproduct-ratio estimates for undiscovered fields are given in table 3.
The estimated means of the undiscovered conventional petroleum volumes are 403 MMBO, 2,280 BCFG, and 27 MMBNGL (table 4).
In addition, the mean size of the largest anticipated undiscovered oil and gas fields is 66 MMBO and 285 BCFG, respectively.
Two “composite” total petroleum systems, the Bou Dab­bous–Tertiary and Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite, are identifed in the Pelagian Province (2048).
The Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System (204801) and corresponding assessment unit coincide with the potential extent of petroleum migration from Eocene source rocks.
The Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System (204802) and corresponding assessment unit coincide with the potential extent of petroleum migration from Jurassic and Cretaceous source rocks.
The Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene El Haria mudstone separates the two total petroleum systems over much of the area.
It is likely that much of the petroleum in the Gulf of Ham­mamet area was derived from Cretaceous source rocks.
If this is the case, then the discovered and undiscovered oil and gas volumes of the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System should be included in the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System.
The primary source rock of the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System is dark-brown marl and mudstone of the lower Eocene Bou Dabbous Formation, which became mature in the Miocene to Pleistocene.
Known reservoir rocks include lateral equivalents of the lower Eocene Bou Dabbous Formation, such as the El Garia fractured limestone; Eocene Jirani dolostone, Jdeir limestone, and Reineche limestone; Oligocene to Miocene Ketatna limestone; and the middle Miocene Aïn Grab limestone and Birsa sandstone.
Seals include Eocene and Miocene mudstone and carbonate rocks.
Known accumulations are in fault blocks, low-amplitude anticlines, high-amplitude anticlines associated with reverse faults, wrench fault structures, and stratigraphic traps.
The primary source rocks of the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System include mudstone of the Jurassic Nara Formation, Lower Cretaceous M’Cherga and Lower Fahdene Formations, and Upper Cretaceous Bahloul Formation.
Oil generation probably began in the early Tertiary, and peak petroleum generation likely took place in the Miocene and Pliocene.
Known reservoir rocks include the Nara Formation dolomite or dolomitic limestone; Upper Jurassic M’Rabtine sandstone; Lower Cretaceous Meloussi and Sidi Aïch sandstone and Orbata and Serdj carbonates; and Upper Cretaceous Zebbag, Isis, Bireno, Douleb, and Miskar carbonates and Abiod chalk.
Seals include Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous mudstone of the M’Cherga Formation, various Lower to Upper Cretaceous mudstone and carbonate rocks, and the Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene El Haria mudstone.
Trap types of known accumulations include fault blocks, low-amplitude anticlines, high-amplitude anticlines associated with reverse faults, wrench fault structures, and stratigraphic traps.
The estimated mean undiscovered conventional petroleum resources in the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System are 667 MMBO, 2,746 BCFG, and 64 MMBNGL.
The estimated mean undiscovered conventional petroleum resources in the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System are 403 MMBO, 2,280 BCFG, and 27 MMBNGL.
The combined estimated mean undiscovered conventional petroleum resources of both total petroleum systems of the Pelagian Province are 1,070 MMBO, 5,026 BCFG, and 91 MMBNGL.
