In 1866, the first oil well on the western Indian subcontinent was drilled at Kundal (figure 13).
The first commercial oil discovery occurred in 1914 when the Attock Oil Company completed a 214-ft well on a thrust-faulted anticline near the town of Khaur (Khan and others, 1986) (figure 13).
Since the discovery, there have been more than 340 wells drilled in the field.
Production at Khaur is from Sakesar and Murree Formation reservoirs.
Drilling from 1920 to 1935 resulted in success at Dhulian, a structural dome 17 km southeast of Khaur.
Other discoveries followed with Joya Mair in 1944, Balkassar in 1946, Karsal in 1956, and Tut in 1967 (figure 13).
The first commercial gas field—Adhi—was found in 1979.
The Adhi gas field produced from rocks ranging in age from Cambrian to Eocene (Petroconsultants, 1996).
Eighteen oil and three gas fields were discovered in the Kohat-Potwar geologic province between 1915 and 1996, and several prospects that were unsuccessfully tested in the 1950s and 1960s are now being reexamined with good results (Quadri and Quadri, 1998).
Production in the Kohat-Potwar geologic province comes primarily from faulted anticlinal traps in rocks ranging in age from Cambrian to Miocene, and at depths of less than 20 m to greater than 1,030 m.
The largest oil and gas field found to date is the Dhurnal field with areal closure of 13.5 km2 and vertical closure of 500 m.
The initial in-place oil estimate for Dhurnal was 102 MMBO (million barrels of oil) (Jaswal and others, 1997).
The plot of cumulative new-field wildcat wells versus completion year for the Kohat-Potwar geologic province (figure 14) shows that the rate of field discovery through time has increased.
The known oil fields ranked by size and grouped in discovery thirds does not show a significant decrease in field size in progressive thirds (figure 15).
The small decrease in field size through time indicates that the province is still not mature in terms of exploration.
A mature province would show a larger decrease in field sizes between the first and third thirds.
The small range of field sizes shown in figure 15 may also be the result of relatively consistent thrust mechanisms creating many anticlinal traps of similar volume and orientation.
The size of oil fields discovered during the second and third third of the exploration history further indicates that, even though the prospective area is small and appears well explored, potential remains for the discovery of additional medium and small fields.
The plot showing cumulative oil volumes found versus the cumulative number of new-field wildcats (figure 16) shows a consistent level of effort required to find similar volumes of oil.
In a more mature area, the number of wildcat wells required to find the same volume of oil would be expected to increase and the curves on the plots to flatten.
The number of gas-field discoveries was insufficient to create a meaningful plot.
The size of the oil fields discovered through time has remained consistent (figure 17), but there has been a significant increase in the discovery rate for smaller fields.
Exploration for deeper targets has increased, but shallow fields are still being found (figure 18).
The largest field may have already been found, but potential for additional oil and gas discoveries in complex structural traps remains good.
