The allocation procedure provided an estimate of the total volume of undiscovered oil and gas resource that may underlie the eastern part of Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR (Table 2).
The procedure outlined above resulted in 2.9 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG), 1.6 thousand barrels of oil (MBO), and 45 thousand barrels of natural gas liquids (MBNGL) being allocated to Gauley River NRA, and 39 BCFG, 24 MBO, and 644 MBNGL being allocated to New River Gorge NR.
The allocations show that natural gas and associated natural gas liquids are the resources that may be expected from Gauley River NRA and New River NR.
Oil is estimated to be a minor resource in these areas.
Most of the production in the area of Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR is from reservoirs in the Mississippian Sandstones Assessment Unit and the Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit, although significant future potential may exist in reservoirs from several other assessment units such as the Devonian Siltstone and Shale Assessment Unit, Marcellus Shale Assessment Unit, and the Catskills Sandstones and Siltstones Assessment Unit (Table 1).
Cell data indicate that nearly all cells in the vicinity of Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR are gas cells, either gas cells that are producing today or have produced in the past (IHS Energy Group, 2002).
Few oil cells are present in the area (Figure 4).
However, oil and natural gas liquids may be produced along with the gas from some cells.
The cell data also indicate that, in the past, the major reservoirs in the vicinity of Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR are in the Mississippian Sandstones Assessment Unit, including the Mauch Chunk Group (Ravencliff Member of the Hinton Formation, Maxon Sandstone (informal), Princeton Sandstone), Big Injun Sandstone (informal), Weir Sandstone (informal); and in the Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit, mainly the “Big Lime” reservoir (Figure 5).
However, significant future potential may exist mainly from Devonian-age reservoirs.
As part of this study, we included the potential for reservoirs in the eight other assessment units as they were mapped geologically during the USGS assessment (Table 1); these assessment units may have significant potential for undiscovered oil and gas resources in this area (Table 2).
Our mapping of oil and gas cells and fields in the area of Gauley River NRA indicates that the western portion of Gauley River NRA is situated within two gas fields; Gauley Mountain Field and Twenty Mile Creek East Field (Figure 6).
Only the eastern part of Gauley River NRA is considered to have potential for undiscovered fields (Figure 6).
The reservoirs in this field are mainly sandstones in the Mississippian-age Mauch Chunk Group, including the Ravencliff Member of the Hinton Formation and Maxon Sandstone (informal).
However, some of the sandstone reservoirs with low permeabilities may be adequately drained without interference at a spacing less than 160 acres.
For the eastern part of Gauley River NRA that has the potential for undiscovered fields, we estimated an allocated volume of 2.9 BCFG, 1.6 MBO, and 45 MBNGL.
The 45 MBNGL represents liquids, both natural gas liquids and minor oil, which may be recovered during the production of natural gas.
The estimate of liquids is based on the ratio of natural gas to liquids that was calculated from each assessment unit assessed by the USGS.
The volume of liquids was allocated to Gauley River NRA using this ratio.
An analysis of production from oil and gas wells in the vicinity of Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR indicates that reservoirs in the Mississippian Sandstones Assess­ment Unit and the Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit are the most productive to date in the study area, although significant potential may exist in deeper Devonian-age reservoirs.
Some reservoirs within the Mississippian Sandstones Assess­ment Unit crop out along the walls of the New River Gorge NR, and thus may not have similar potential for undiscovered gas resources over the total area of New River Gorge NR.
The Mississippian Sandstones Assessment Unit includes known reservoirs of the Maxon Sandstone (informal), Ravencliff Member of the Hinton Formation, Princeton Sandstone, Big Injun Sandstone (informal), and Weir sandstones (informal) (Figure 2).
The Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit includes the Greenbrier Group, of which the oolitic “Big Lime” reservoirs are the most productive (Figure 2).
There have been several decades of production for some fields, and these data indicate that the fields with primary reservoirs included in the Mississippian Sandstones Assessment Unit have a mean field size of about 9 BCFG.
The larger fields may simply be ones within welldefined structures, such as anticlines, with surface expressions that were relatively easy to identify; smaller fields may, for the most part, be stratigraphic fields that are small and not as easily found as structural traps.
The primary reservoir in the Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit is a thick, porous oolitic limestone, and these reservoirs display a size distribution expected from stratigraphic reservoirs.
The mean size for gas fields in the Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit is about 5 BCFG.
The EUR plot for sandstone reservoirs in the Mississippian Sandstones Assessment Unit is shown in Figure 10.
The median EUR is approximately 80 million cubic feet of gas (MMCFG), and the maximum EUR from data available to us is just over 1000 MMCFG, or 1 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG).
The EUR plot for “Big Lime” reservoirs of the Greenbrier Limestone Assessment Unit is shown in Figure 11.
The median EUR is about 55 MMCFG, and the maximum EUR is just under 2000 MMCFG, or 2 BCFG.
The mean well production from Greenbrier limestone reservoirs provided in the Gas Atlas is approximately 300 MMCFG.
In the area of Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR, reservoirs within the Mississippian Sandstones AU and Greenbrier Limestone AU represent the primary producing intervals, but other reservoirs may also significantly contribute to field size in the future.
Fractured reservoirs in the Devonian Siltstone and Shale Assessment Unit may be a significant reservoir in the future, as may be fractured shales of the Marcellus Shale Assessment Unit and reservoirs in the Catskill Sandstones and Siltstones Assessment Unit.
These deeper reservoirs may be tested and produced in the future in Gauley River NRA and New River Gorge NR.
In the vicinity of New River Gorge NR there are several small fields, most of which produce from Mississippian-age limestone and sandstone reservoirs, similar to Gauley River NRA (Figure 7).
