During much of Cretaceous time, the part of Wyoming and Montana that is now the Bighorn Basin was located near the western edge of the Rocky Mountain foreland basin, an elongate north-south structural depression that developed to the east of the tectonically active Western Cordilleran highlands.
Throughout much of its history, the foreland basin was flooded by a broad epicontinental sea, referred to as the Western Interior Seaway (WIS) that developed in response to foreland basin subsidence and eustatic sealevel rise (Steidtmann, 1993) (figure 5).
At its maximum extent, the seaway extended a distance of more than 3,000 mi from the Arctic Ocean to the Gulf of Mexico (Kauffman, 1977).
Fluctuations in relative sea level and variations in sediment supply along the western shoreline of the seaway during much of Cretaceous time resulted in a complex pattern of intertonguing marine, marginal marine, and nonmarine deposits (figure 6).
Marine deposition ended near the close of the Cretaceous Period (early Maastrichtian), as the foreland basin gradually filled and the western shoreline of the seaway retreated eastward.
The uppermost Cretaceous strata also record the onset of the Laramide orogeny (Dickinson and others, 1988; Johnson and others, 2004), a period of crustal instability and compressional tectonics that commenced in early Maastrichtian time and fragmented the Rocky Mountain foreland basin into numerous smaller structural basins that were flanked by rising basement-cored uplifts (figure 4).
Basins such as the Bighorn Basin subsided rapidly and became depocenters for thick accumulations of clastic debris eroded from the surrounding uplifts during latest Cretaceous and Paleocene time.
During Eocene time, the basin continued to be filled with volcaniclastic debris that originated in the Yellowstone- Absaroka volcanic area to the west (Love, 1988).
Volcanic activity ended by Oligocene time but basin filling continued as Oligocene and Miocene volcaniclastic sediments spilled over the crest of the Bighorn Mountains and were deposited in the Powder River Basin to the east (McKenna and Love, 1972).
In middle Miocene time regional uplift initiated the exhumation of the surrounding uplifts and the excavation of the basin which continues to the present day (Love, 1988).
