The Lower to Middle Pennsylvanian Pottsville Formation is composed principally of shale, sandstone, and coal; thicknesses of the formation locally exceed 6,000 ft (Thomas, 1988).
The formation is exposed at the surface in the eastern one-third of the Black Warrior Basin and is overlain with angular unconformity by poorly consolidated Mesozoic and Cenozoic strata of the Gulf Coastal Plain and Mississippi Embayment in the western two-thirds of the area (figure 3) (Mellen, 1947).
Economically important coals, primarily in the upper part of the formation, are assigned to several widespread “coal zones” (McCalley, 1900).
In ascending order, these are the Black Creek, Ream, Mary Lee, Gillespy, Curry, Pratt, Cobb, Gwin, Utley, and Brookwood “coal zones” (figure 4).
Butts (1926) was the first to recognize the evidence for repeated marine transgressions and regressions during Pottsville deposition.
Wanless (1976) made passing mention of cyclicity in the Pottsville Formation, but it was not until the intensive exploration for conventional hydrocarbons and coal-bed gas in the 1980s that basinwide depositional cycles were confirmed (Sestak, 1984; Thomas, 1988; Pashin and others, 1991; Pashin, 1994a, b).
The first cyclostratigraphic subdivision of the upper part of the formation was made by Pashin and others (1991), who defined a series of basinwide coarsening-upward and coaling-upward cycles.
Pashin (1994a, 1998) and Pashin and others (2004) suggested that high-frequency glacial eustasy in the Milankovitch long eccentricity band (about 0.4 Ma) was the dominant causal mechanism of the depositional cyclicity.
Pottsville Formation cycles are internally heterogeneous, consisting primarily of mudstones and sandstones (Pashin, 1994b, 1998) (figure 5).
The basal surface of each cycle is typically sharp and locally truncates strata of the underlying cycle; marine fossils are concentrated above this surface (figure 5).
The mudstone above the fossil concentrations is typically between 30 and 300 ft thick, coarsens upward, and contains burrows and scattered shells.
Sandstone varies from litharenite containing low-grade metamorphic rock fragments to quartzarenite (Mack and others, 1983).
The litharenite is dark and impermeable, whereas the lighter colored, quartzose sandstone is permeable and of reservoir quality (Pashin and others, 1991).
In places, the litharenite is more than 150 ft thick and includes progradational foresets and a variety of channel fills.
Each cycle is capped by a lithologically heterogeneous coal zone containing one or more coals of variable geometry and thickness that are intercalated with mudstone and sandstone (Pashin and others, 2004).
The individual cycles are interpreted as flooding-surface-bounded parasequences, in the terminology of Vail (1987).
The basal surfaces are transgressive surfaces of erosion, or ravinements, and the associated fossil concentrations are in condensed sections that rest directly on the ravinement surfaces (Liu and Gastaldo, 1992; Pashin, 1998) (figure 5).
The coarsening-upward mudstone intervals above the fossil concentrations and litharenite foreset beds record deltaic progradation during highstand (for example, see Gastaldo and others, 1993), and each mudstone unit apparently rests on a maximum flooding surface (figure 5).
Pottsville coal zones accumulated in diverse coastal-plain settings from highstand into the early stages of marine regression (Pashin, 1998).
The associated sandstone units include a broad range of fluvial and tidal-flat deposits, and the mudstone units represent flood-basin and mudflat environments (Rheams and Benson, 1982; Pashin and others, 1991; Demko and Gastaldo, 1996).
Coals are the products of peat swamps, and those in the Pottsville Formation represent a spectrum of domed and lowlying peat swamp deposits that spanned the coastal plain (Eble, 1990; Pashin, 1994a, c; Pashin and others, 2004).
The four cross sections on plate 1 illustrate the stratigraphic architecture of the eight lower coal zones (Black Creek through Gwin coal zones) in the Warrior coal field.
These cross sections were modified from Pashin and others (2004; their cross sections D–D’ on plates 2, 4, 6, and 8).
Cycle-bounding flooding surfaces are present at the base of the thick mudstone units and are overlain by mudstone with slightly higher radioactivity than adjacent shale units.
All cycles thicken toward the southeast (plate 1), and the upper part of the Pottsville Formation is thickest in the Moundville–Cedar Cove depocenter in northern Hale and southern Tuscaloosa Counties, Alabama (Pashin and others, 2004).
This southeastward increase in thickness is shown by the isopach map of the interval between the Ream and the Gwin coal zones in figure 6 (Pashin and others, 2004).
The total thickness of coal, in beds thicker than 1 ft, in the upper part of the Pottsville Formation is shown in figure 7.
Net coal thickness in the Black Creek through Brookwood coal zones increases toward the southeast, and net coal thickness exceeds 40 ft in much of the Moundville–Cedar Cove depocenter (see figure 6) in northern Hale and southern Tuscaloosa Counties, Alabama.
In some localized areas in northern Hale County, net coal thickness exceeds 70 ft (Pashin and others, 2004).
Strata associated with the Pottsville Formation coal intervals lack matrix permeability to water; thus, virtually all flow is through natural fractures (Pashin and others, 1991), which include joints, cleats, and fault-related shear fractures (Ward and others, 1984; Pashin and others, 1991, 1999a; Pashin, 1998).
Pashin and others (1995) and Pashin and Groshong (1998) suggested that large-scale folds and faults determine the abundance and openness of natural fractures and thereby influence gas production from coals (Pashin and others, 2004).
The structural framework of the Black Warrior Basin can be characterized in general terms as a homocline that dips southwest toward the Ouachita orogenic belt and contains numerous superimposed folds and faults (Thomas, 1988) (figure 8).
Folds of the Appalachian orogenic belt are superimposed on the southeast margin of this homocline and include the Sequatchie anticline, the Coalburg syncline, and the Blue Creek anticline.
