CAI data consist of 204 analyses from surface samples.
We used CAI only in a supplemental way in this analysis because of the relatively coarse maturity scale compared to vitrinite (Figure VR1) and because most data lie in the mountains, well outside of the 1002 area (Plate VR1).
However, CAI data were used in structural studies to constrain estimates of prior maximum burial and subsequent amounts of uplift and erosion (Cole and others, Chapage SM).
An example of a combined set of vitrinite reflectance and CAI data employed in thermal maturity mapping is provided in the thermal maturity map of Alaska (Johnsson and Howell, 1996).
That map and those in Johnsson and others (1993) provide a regional view of the thermal maturity of rocks in northern Alaska.
Vitrinite analyses from 380 surface samples and 896 shot-hole samples were combined with a surface-projected vitrinite value from each of 23 wells.
These data were contoured using GeoGraphixª software.
The contour map was inspected, anomalous high and low values that could not be geologically substantiated were eliminated, and the contour pattern was generalized by hand.
The resulting map, a generalized thermal maturity contour map of surface vitrinite reflectance, is provided in Plate VR1.
The contour interval was selected to show boundaries relevant to hydrocarbon generation, preservation, and destruction (0.6-, 1.3-, 2.0-percent Ro, respectively).
Supplemental contours on either side of this range are also provided.
The vitrinite reflectance isograds (Plate VR1) display an irregular east­northeast-trend across the map area—a trend that broadly mimics that of the mountain front.
Within the 1002 area, isograd values increase southward from less than 0.4-percent Ro to slightly more than 2.0-percent Ro.
Values as high as 4.8-percent Ro occur south of the 1002 area in the mountains.
The northern half of the 1002 area is characterized by highly variable vitrinite reflectance values ranging between 0.2- to slightly more than 0.4­percent Ro.
The variability is such that no meaningful contour of less than 0.4-percent Ro could be drawn.
Likely sources of this variability are the difficulty of distinguishing bedrock from surficial samples and analytical variation.
The trend of the 0.4-percent Ro isograd reveals at least two important geologic features.
One is a prominent northeastward excursion along the axial region of the Marsh Creek anticline, an apparent indication of uplift in its axial region.
Another is in the Niguanak area where the isograd makes a broad, arcuate excursion to the north approximating the surface trace of the passive roof-thrust (SLRT) mapped by Potter and others (Chapage BD, Figure BD2).
Just south of the 0.4-percent Ro isograd in the Niguanak area, reflectance values of 0.5- to 0.99-percent Ro are present in the area of Jurassic and Cretaceous rock exposures (see inset map, Plate VR1).
The validity of readings of 0.6-percent Ro and greater is suspect because apatite fission-track analyses from this area (O'Sullivan and others, 1993) indicate that these rocks have been heated to temperatures less than those required by 0.6­percent Ro, about 100°C (Figure VR1).
However, uncertainty in exact sample locations offers the possibility that the data are from different rocks and therefore the vitrinite readings may be valid.
If valid, these data would be indicative of structural complexity that juxtaposes higher maturity rocks with lower maturity rocks.
This would also be evidence that thermal maturity was imposed prior to deformation.
This seems to be the case along the Jago River just west of the Niguanak area (see inset map, Plate VR1), where a thrust-fault separates higher maturity Hue Shale from lower maturity Canning Formation.
With respect to hydrocarbon generation, the map reveals that most rocks now at the surface in the 1002 area are undermature, not having been heated enough to generate oil.
Mature rocks, 0.6– to 1.3-percent Ro, occur in a band three to six miles wide across the southern parts of the 1002 area.
The zone of hydrocarbon preservation, 1.3– to 2.0-percent Ro, is of generally similar width immediately to the south.
The zone of dry gas (>2.0-percent Ro), for the most part, lies south of the 1002 area.
The close-spaced isograds in the southern part of the 1002 area are interpreted as an indication of former deep burial, heating, and subsequent uplift and erosion of the rocks in this area.
Inspection of structure cross-sections (Cole and others, Chapage SM; Potter and others, Chapage BD) suggests that heating was mainly by sedimentary rather than tectonic burial.
Uplift and erosion are related to the various episodes of Brooks Range folding and faulting (Murphy, Chapage FT; Potter and others, Chapage BD; Cole and others, Chapage SM).
Amounts of former burial may be estimated if the rate of vitrinite reflectance increase with depth is known.
In the following section, analysis of vitrinite reflectance profiles in wells provides information needed to make these estimates.
Vitrinite analyses from 860 samples in 23 wells located near the 1002 area were analysed (Figures VR3–VR11; Tables VR2, VR4).
Graphs of Ro versus depth show a wide range in data quality.
In several wells, the data appear as a cloud of points (West Staines 2, Hammerhead 1, and Hammerhead 2 shown in Figures VR7A, -9A, -9B, respectively).
Correlation coefficients as low as 0.1 attest to the noisy nature of these data (Table VR4).
Other wells show a narrowly-constrained, linear progression of Ro values with depth and correspondingly high correlation coefficients (Kemik 2, West Kavik 1, Aurora 1, and Belcher 1 shown in Figures VR3C, -4B, -10A, -10B, respectively).
The origin of variation in these data is unknown but has several likely sources including contamination by sample cavings, reworking or recycling of older higher-maturity vitrinite, insufficient sample size, operator bias, and possibly even multiple operators.
Reworking of older, higher-maturity vitrinite into younger, lower-maturity sediments of the Sagavanirktok Formation in the Point Thomson area is suggested by the analysis of Houseknecht and Hayba (Chapage HG).
Variation by multiple operators can be significant as shown in the interlaboratory comparison (N=13) by Claypool and Magoon (1985).
Based on analyses of 16 samples with thermal maturities ranging from 0.55- to 2.5-percent Ro, comparison of mean-value reflectance determinations shows standard deviations that range from 0.05 to 0.66 % Ro and coefficient of variation that range from 6 to 26 percent.
Using subsurface vitrinite profiles, the level of thermal maturity of each known petroleum accumulation near the 1002 area is shown in Figure VR15.
This plot shows that the oil accumulations are located within or just above the uppermost part of the oil window.
Gas in the Kemik accumulation lies within the dry gas zone as expected.
The Point Thomson accumulation, consisting of gas and some oil, at a maturity level of about 0.7-percent Ro seems anomalous.
The composition and maturity level of this hydrocarbon accumulation suggests either an unusual gas-prone source rock or migration of gas from deeper, more mature horizons was trapped along with oil from nearby, less thermally mature oil source rocks.
Similarly, the Kavik gas field appears anomalous in that it is composed of dry gas and lies at a maturity level within the upper part of the zone of oil preservation.
This situation suggests a gas-prone source rock, migration of gas from deeper, more mature source rocks, or the cracking of oil from deeper, more mature horizons.
