The existence of the Lower Sunniland Fractured “Dark Carbonate” Oil play is based on the discovery of the Lake Trafford field in Collier County.
Lake Trafford field is located immediately southeast of Corkscrew field (figure 6).
The dark carbonate unit of the lower part of the Sunniland Formation is believed to contain the primary source beds for oil produced in the tidal shoal grainstone units of the upper part of the Sunniland Formation (plays 5001 and 5005).
Although no minimum size (more than 1 MMBO) oil accumulations were proven, the one discovery well (Mobil Oil Corporation; spudded March 1969) used to define the Lake Trafford field produced commercial quantities of oil from fractured limestone at a depth of about 11,800 ft.
The producing zone is commonly referred to as the “rubble zone” of the dark carbonate unit in the lower Sunniland Formation (Means, 1977).
The matrix porosity of the producing zone, as measured by well logs, is about 9 volume percent, and the pore space is oil saturated.
Core recovered from the rubble zone in the discovery well was described as burrowed, fractured, and stylolitized (Lloyd, 1992); these characteristics would increase the porosity and permeability of the rocks, thus increasing the likelihood of commercial production from them.
In March 1988, the discovery well was shut in after producing about 278,000 barrels of oil.
Two offset vertical wells, located to the northwest and south of the producing well, and a recent horizontal test well were dry holes.
Based on the production history of the one vertical well, horizontal wells penetrating the rubble zone of the dark carbonate unit are estimated to produce a few hundred barrels of oil per day.
Owner/operator Brian Richter (oral commun, 1994) reported that the horizontal test well missed the targeted pay zone; however, subsequent successful horizontal tests have reopened the field.
The play boundary is defined by two factors: (1) the thickness of the dark carbonate unit, partly determined from the examination of cross sections and observations of structural isopachs (Applegate and Pontigo, 1984), and (2) evidence (in core recoveries from reference wells) (Lloyd, 1992; Mitchell-Tapping, 1984) of the presence of rocks that possess favorable source-rock characteristics and either the presence of the rubble zone or evidence of fracturing (Montgomery, 1987).
This play is assigned moderate potential for undiscovered oil resources.
The area of the play that has the best potential for undiscovered oil resources is northwest of the Lake Trafford field.
Expected depths of production within the play area are estimated between 10,000 and 13,000 ft, with a median depth of about 11,800 ft.
Potentially productive fractured reservoir rocks are present in the lower dark carbonate zone of the lower Sunniland Formation and are enclosed by impermeable, micritic, tidal-flat, lime mudstones.
The unit is sealed below by the Punta Gorda Anhydrite.
Indigenous hydrocarbons are produced from brown and medium-dark-gray micritic and argillaceous limestones whose total carbonate content average 76 weight percent and range from 50 to 98 weight percent.
These micritic carbonates are commonly algal laminated and have TOC values ranging from less than 0.4 to 3.0 weight percent.
Potential source beds (more than 0.4 weight percent TOC) within the unit average about 1.8 weight percent TOC.
Oil produced from the well in the Lake Trafford field has an API gravity of about 26°, similar to oil in upper Sunniland producing wells (API gravity ranging from 21° to 28°).
Inasmuch as oils in the upper Sunniland Formation are derived from source rocks in the lower dark carbonate, the similarity in API gravities is to be expected.
Similarly, lower Sunniland oils are expected to have a GOR range similar to that of upper Sunniland oils (about 80:1 to 100:1).
Median size for undiscovered fields of the dark carbonate play was estimated at 2.5 MMBO with a mean total undiscovered oil resource estimated at 12.2 million barrels (table 1).
