The total petroleum system (TPS) approach defines a mappable pod of active source rock, all known and undiscovered reservoirs, and the processes and mechanisms required for oil and gas accumulations to exist (Magoon and Dow, 1994).
The Mowry Composite TPS  is present within all of the Southwestern Wyoming Province (figure 1) and extends westward to the approximate footwall cutoffs of strata against the Hogsback and Prospect thrusts (see cross sections by Lamerson, 1982).
The Mowry Composite TPS is considered a composite system because there are multiple source rocks that could have generated petroleum mainly from Type-II and III organic matter in marine shales of the Mowry and Thermopolis Shales and their equivalents, and from Type-III, with minor contributions of Type-I organic matter from terrestrial facies of the Bear River and Frontier Formations and Dakota Sandstone (Burtner and Warner, 1984; Burtner and others, 1994) (figure 2).
Reservoirs are sandstones in the Frontier Formation, Bear River Formation, Dakota Sandstone and equivalents, and the Muddy Sandstone Member of the Thermopolis Shale (figure 2).
Traps are stratigraphic, structural, and basin centered, and seals are diagenetic, capillary, or lithologic, including marine, estuarine, and terrestrial shale.
There are AUs that extend over much of the Southwestern Wyoming Province: one is a basin-centered (continuous) accumulation (AU 261) and the other is conventional (AU 201).
Cretaceous shales are thought to be the source of much of the petroleum found in reservoirs of the Dakota Sandstone and Frontier Formation (Warner, 1982;  Burtner and Warner, 1984).
Oil produced from the Dakota in the Bridger Lake field (figure 3) has saturated hydrocarbon distributions similar to oils derived from other Cretaceous source rocks in Rocky Mountain basins (Law and Clayton, 1987).
In the Tip Top field on the northern Moxa arch (figure 3), liquids produced from the Frontier are thought to have a Cretaceous source based on pristane/phytane ratios (Edman and Cook, 1992, page 19).
Hydrocarbons have not been directly typed back to the Mowry, but the Mowry/Aspen is the Cretaceous shale with the highest content of total organic matter (Burtner and Warner, 1984) and is thought to be the dominant contributor of petroleum (Burtner and Warner, 1984; Law and Clayton, 1987).
Other possible source rocks in the Mowry Composite Total Petroleum System are marine shales of the Allen Hollow and Thermopolis Shales and Bear River Formation and coals and carbonaceous shale in the Frontier and Bear River Formations and Dakota Sandstone.
Type-II and III organic matter and minor amounts of Type-I organic matter are present in these strata (Burtner and others, 1994, page 1620).
Total organic carbon (TOC) extracted from 19 samples of the Mowry Shale in the Green River Basin ranges between 1.2 and 2.5 percent, anomalously low according to Burtner and Warner (1984) who believe the anomaly is due to the expulsion of carbon dioxide and hydrocarbons from the source rock.
In the province, the Mowry consists of laminated and bioturbated organic-rich mudrock (Byers and Larson, 1979).
High resistivity values indicated on geophysical logs measured throughout the Mowry generally correspond to siliceous shales while low resistivity values (and high gamma values) can be related to bentonites (Nixon, 1973).
The shale is siliceous due to the presence of abundant radiolarians that favored the cool waters of the restricted boreal Mowry sea (Davis, 1970).
The silica was originally provided from volcanic sources near the Idaho batholith (Davis, 1970).
The anoxic condition of the Mowry sea not only preserved the radiolarian tests but preserved organic matter as well.
The laminated mudrock grades upward and landward (westward) into bioturbated mudstone and sandstone, indicating more oxic conditions, shallower water, and proximity to the clastic source area (Burtner and Warner, 1984).
Coals and carbonaceous shales in the Frontier, Dakota, and Bear River most likely contributed gas following burial and maturation.
Thicker coals in the Frontier, which are presently restricted to the western thrust belt, attained maturity as early as the Late Cretaceous (Valenti, 1987).
Coals of the Frontier reach a maximum reported thickness of 24 ft and are present in as many as nine separate seams (Weaver and M'Gonigle, 1987).
The source rocks of the Mowry Composite TPS are mature over much of the province except where vitrinite re.ectance values (Ro) are less than 0.6 percent at the basin margins and within the interior of the basin at the Rock Springs uplift (figure 4).
Mature source rocks are also present in parts of the upper plates of the western Wyoming thrusts (Burtner and others, 1994), and maturities as high as 2.01 percent Ro have been recorded from the Bear River Formation in the northern thrust belt (Wallem and others, 1981).
The Mowry has suficient TOC and level of maturity to have provided an early Late Cretaceous (100-80 Ma) pulse of petroleum generation prior to the development of the Hogsback and Prospect thrusts (figures 5A and B).
The Mowry was buried in a rapidly subsiding foreland basin due to tectonic loading associated with the more westward Meade-Crawford thrusts (Burtner and others, 1994).
Presumably, coals and carbonaceous shale in the Frontier, and perhaps the Bear River Formation and Dakota Sandstone, also generated petroleum early in the development of this petroleum system.
Another period of generation may have taken place between 70 and 60 Ma following burial of the foredeep deposits beneath the Absaroka thrust (see Warner, 1982; Reisser and Blanke, 1989; Burtner and others, 1994).
One-dimensional modeling of burial history and thermal maturity was performed for seven well locations within the province east of the Wyoming thrusts, to determine thermal maturity and timing of petroleum generation (figures 5B and C) (Roberts and others, Chapter 3, this CD-ROM).
The start of oil generation for the Mowry Shale, a mix of Type-II and Type-III kerogen, occurred as early as 70 Ma in the deepest part of the province (Adobe Town location, figure 5B).
Oil generation started at about 46 Ma on the Moxa arch (Bruff 2 location, figure 5B), which is consistent with the work of Dutton and Hamlin (1992) who thought these source rocks passed through the oil window at about 45 Ma at the earliest on the Moxa arch.
Oil generation ended at all locations by about 43 Ma except on the Moxa arch.
In the deepest parts of the province at the Adobe Town, Eagles Nest, and Wagon Wheel locations (figure 5B), the generation of gas from the cracking of oil began at about 56 Ma, within about 6 m.y. of the end of oil generation.
Gas generation from oil cracking ended at these deep locations by 41 Ma.
Gas-prone source rocks of the Mowry (those containing predominantly Type-III kerogen), which were modeled only for those locations west of the Rock Springs uplift (figure 5B), began generating gas at about 78 Ma.
Gas generation from the Mowry has reached a peak at all locations but has ended only at Wagon Wheel.
They think liquid hydrocarbons are more likely to be found in the chilled thermal margins along the Uinta Mountains or in stratigraphic traps off the east .ank of the Moxa arch, for example Swan field (Reisser and Blanke, 1989, their figure 16).
Migration of petroleum from source rocks of the Mowry Composite Total Petroleum System may have been two-phase or perhaps continuous and consisted of lateral, vertical, and localized migration.
Early lateral migration of petroleum generated between 100 and 80 Ma in what is now the overthrust belt took place before most of the major intrabasinal structures had formed in the province.
The continuous Oyster Ridge Sandstone (2d bench of second Frontier, figure 6) could have acted as a carrier bed and allowed the migration of gas eastward into the basin, perhaps even into stratigraphic traps east of the Rock Springs uplift.
Migration of oil and gas into fluvial reservoirs of the Dakota is interpreted at about 70 Ma following emplacement of the Absaroka thrust (Reisser and Blanke, 1989).
Vertical migration took place from about 55 Ma until present after most of the large Laramide structures, like the Rock Springs uplift were already developed.
Migration of gas in suf.cient volumes to displace interstitial water in areas such as the marginally mature La Barge platform is indicated from the low water yields, variable gas/water contacts, low permeability, and overpressured reservoirs (Webel, 1979; Edman and Cook, 1992).
In-place generation, localized migration, and trapping took place within the basin centers.
Dutton and Hamlin (1992) showed that most of the Mowry had not passed through the gas window on the Moxa arch and thought that gas was generated from the deep basin and migrated into the Frontier about 43 Ma.
Burial-history plots conducted during this study (Roberts and others, Chapter 3, this CD-ROM) also show similar patterns of thermal history for the Moxa arch (figure 5C).
Burial-history plots do not show the oil cracking to gas on the Moxa, and API gravities from all fields range between 33 and 60 degrees (light oil to condensate) (Cardinal and Stewart, 1979; Miller and others, 1992).
Burtner and Warner (1984) show distinct Type-III, gas-prone source rock in many areas of the Greater Green River Basin.
Light oil and condensate now reservoired in the Frontier may have been expelled from any Type-II kerogen present in the Mowry on the Moxa arch or the thrust belt during an earlier period of migration.
Reservoirs in the province can be divided into two groups of rocks separated by the Mowry Shale:  the lower group is almost entirely Early Cretaceous and consists of the Dakota and Muddy Sandstones and equivalents; the upper group is Late Cretaceous and consists of the Frontier Formation (figures 2 and 6).
The Dakota Sandstone consists of two informal members, lower and upper (Ryer and others, 1987), in the southern part of the Moxa arch and inter.ngers, in part, with the Thermopolis Shale to the north.
The lower member of the Dakota is about 100-210 ft thick on the Moxa arch, intertongues with the Thermopolis Shale and changes nomenclature into the lower part of the Bear River Formation to the west and into the Cloverly Formation to the northeast (figure 2) (Ryer and others, 1987).
The upper member of the Dakota is as thick as 275 ft in the northern part of the Moxa arch (Ryer and others, 1987) and can be correlated with the upper part of the Bear River Formation to the west and with the Muddy Sandstone to the northeast (figure 2).
Reservoirs in the Dakota and Muddy Sandstones and equivalent strata in the Bear River Formation consist of fluvial, estuarine, and nearshore marine sandstones.
The fluvial systems were sourced from the south, fed a generally east-west oriented shoreline, and prograded over much of the province before being transgressed by the Thermopolis Shale (Ryer and others, 1987).
Subsequent progradation and incision during deposition of the Muddy Sandstone also extended northward, encompassing a large part of the province before being transgressed by Mowry Shale.
To the west on the Moxa arch, the Muddy consists of silty beds but grades into coarsening-upward successions of the Bear River Formation just west of the province boundary.
Dakota reservoirs on the south part of the Moxa arch are conventional oil accumulations.
Reservoirs produce from depths as great as about 17,700 ft (IHS Energy Group, 2001).
The reservoirs have distinct gas or oil/water contacts and have higher permeabilities than the Dakota or Bear River in the northern Moxa arch.
Dakota/Muddy sandstone porosity has a range of 8-23  percent  and permeability of 0.06-750 millidarcies (mD) (Cardinal and Stewart, 1979;  Miller and others, 1992).
Sandstones are dominantly sublitharenites, but minor quartz arenites, subarkoses, and litharenites are also present (Muller and Coalson, 1989, their figure 5).
Fields in the Moxa/La Barge area produce much less water than southern Moxa arch fields.
Some of these Dakota reservoirs have low permeabilities, such as at Seven Mile Gulch fields (figure 3) where the permeability is as low as 0.06 mD and are thought to be part of regional accumulations (Morton, 1992a).
The northernmost reported gas/water contact is in Church Buttes field (figure 3) (Curry, 1992); farther north in the Whiskey Butte and Seven Mile Gulch fields the gas column is reported to be part of a regional accumulation (Morton, 1992a and b).
The fields in between (primarily Fabian Ditch and Bruff) show some evidence to support a conventional rather than continuous type of accumulation.
In this study, Bruff field is considered to be the northernmost conventional accumulation in the Dakota/Muddy/Bear River interval.
Along the arch, the mode of deposition changes from primarily fluvial in the south to primarily shoreface in the north (Ryer and others, 1987).
It is possible that both types of accumulation exist here, with conventional reservoirs associated with the fluvial facies and continuous reservoirs present within the shoreface facies.
