Present-day structure of the Bighorn Basin developed primarily during the Laramide orogeny, a period of crustal instability that began during Late Cretaceous time and ended in early Eocene time (Gries, 1983a; Love, 1988).
Many of the structures are the result of compressional deformation characterized by Precambrian basement-involved thrust faults (thickskinned), wrench faults, and strongly folded and faulted anticlines and synclines.
The northeast, east, and south margins of the basin are formed by basement-cored uplifts referred to as the Pryor, Bighorn, and Owl Creek Mountains, respectively (figures 1, 2).
These uplifts are flanked by highly folded and faulted sedimentary rocks that range from Cambrian to Paleocene in age, whereas the central part of the basin is covered by nearly flatlying lower Eocene and undifferentiated Tertiary and Quaternary rocks that mask the structure of the older rocks in the central part of the basin (figure 2).
The basin axis generally trends northwest-southeast but locally is north-south, and there is marked asymmetry with the steeper basin flank on the west (figures 2, 3).
In the footwall of the Oregon Basin fault, the basin axis roughly parallels the fault, but toward the north end of the Oregon Basin anticline it is offset to the northwest (Blackstone, 1986a) and lies west of the Oregon Basin thrust fault (figure 3).
The deep basin trough west of the Oregon Basin thrust fault is variously referred to as the Clark's Fork Basin or Clark's Fork sub-basin (Gingerich, 1983; Johnson and Finn, 1998a).
In this area, the basin axis generally trends north-south and passes beneath the eastern edge of the Beartooth thrust near the Montana-Wyoming state line (figure 3).
The northern boundary of the Bighorn Basin is formed by the Nye-Bowler lineament, a regional anticlinal trend extending about 60 mi east-southeast from the northern part of the Beartooth mountain front to the Pryor Mountains (figures 2, 3).
This trend consists of a series of highly faulted anticlines and domes that Wilson (1936) interpreted to overlie a left- lateral basement shear zone.
The Nye-Bowler lineament forms the structural divide separating the Bighorn Basin to the south from the Reed Point syncline and Crazy Mountains Basin to the northwest (figure 4).
Important petroleum accumulations associated with the Nye-Bowler lineament include Golden Dome and Dry Creek gas fields (figure1).
The northwest margin of the basin is formed by the Beartooth Mountains, a Precambrian-cored uplift of Laramide age that is thrust fault-bounded and flanked by steeply dipping-to-overturned sedimentary strata (Foose and others, 1961).
The west margin is formed by the Absaroka Range, which is comprised mainly of Eocene andesitic volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks associated with large stratovolcanos (Sundell, 1993).
These volcanic rocks are believed to unconformably overlie folded and faulted Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and lower Tertiary sedimentary rocks (Sundell, 1990).
Major thrust faults in the Bighorn Basin include the Beartooth fault, the Line Creek fault, and the Oregon Basin fault on the west side of the basin, the Elk Basin fault in the north-central part, and the Rio thrust fault on the east (figure 3).
The Beartooth fault is the major basin-bounding fault in the northwestern part of the basin (figure 3).
The fault plane dips to the west-southwest and displacement is generally to the east and northeast, thrusting the Beartooth Mountains over Paleozoic and Mesozoic sedimentary rocks with approximately 7.5 mi of overhang along the northwest margin of the basin (Bonini and Kinard, 1983).
The fault was penetrated by the Amoco Beartooth #1 well (figure 2), which was spudded in basement rocks on the Beartooth uplift approximately 1.5 mi west of the Precambrian contact.
The well drilled through about 8,400 ft of granitic rock before it encountered the fault zone, then drilled through a complexly faulted and folded sequence of sedimentary rocks to a total depth of about 13,800 ft (Wise, 1997; 2000).
The Line Creek fault, located in the western part of the basin (figure 3), is an east-directed, west-dipping thrust fault that originates in Precambrian rocks and involves strata as young as the Paleocene Fort Union Formation (Blackstone, 1986a).
The fault starts near the Montana-Wyoming state line, and extends south to southeast approximately 40 mi (figure 3).
According to Parker and Jones (1986) the maximum vertical and horizontal displacements on the Line Creek fault are estimated to be about 12,000 ft and 10,000 ft, respectively.
The fault is buried beneath the Eocene Willwood Formation.
The Oregon Basin fault, the major thrust fault along the west side of the basin, trends north-south to northwest- southeast for about 80 mi and separates the relatively undeformed central deep trough of the basin to the east from the highly deformed basin margin on the west (figure 3).
According to Blackstone (1986a,b) the fault plane dips 40∞ to 70∞ to the west-southwest, flattening with depth and possibly extending beneath many of the anticlines along the west and southwest margins of the basin that contain important petroleum accumulations.
Blackstone (1986a) estimated that the displacement, although variable, ranges to as much as 25,000 ft in the vicinity of Oregon Basin.
It is concealed beneath rocks of the lower Eocene Willwood Formation but was penetrated in the Hunt Oil Company Loch Katrine no. 1 well on the east flank of the Oregon Basin anticline (figure 2), which was drilled to evaluate deep gas potential in the subthrust (Rountree, 1980).
The well, spudded in sedimentary rocks west of the buried trace of the fault on the northeast flank of the Oregon Basin anticline, drilled through steeply dipping Mesozoic and Paleozoic sedimentary rocks until it encountered the fault zone at around 10,500 ft.
Below the fault, the well penetrated several thousand feet of vertical to overturned Mesozoic rocks before drilling through a relatively flatlying section of Mesozoic and Paleozoic sedimentary rocks to a total depth of 23,990 ft (figure 2) (Parker and Jones, 1986; Blackstone, 1986a,b; Stone, 1985).
East of and parallel to the northern segment of the Oregon Basin fault is the Elk Basin fault (figure 3) (Ryder, 1987; Stone, 1983), a west-dipping, east-directed thrust fault rooted in Precambrian crystalline rocks and terminating in Upper Cretaceous rocks in the subsurface (Ryder, 1987; Stone, 1983).
The fault trends north-south about 25 mi but may extend southward several miles, merging with the Oregon Basin fault in the deep part of the basin trough (Talbot, 1996).
Several important oil accumulations are associated with, and located on, the hanging wall of the Elk Basin thrust, including Elk Basin field that has an estimated grown accumulation size of about 20 MMBO in Cretaceous reservoirs (figure 1).
The most important thrust fault on the east side of the Bighorn Basin is the Rio thrust named by Stone (2004a).
It trends about 35-40 mi northwest-southeast, dips east-northeast, is west- southwest-vergent, and separates the relatively undeformed central deep part of the Bighorn Basin on the west from the highly deformed basin margin on the east (figures 2, 3).
The fault originates in Precambrian basement rocks, with displacements of around 3,000 to 4,000 ft, and dies out in Cretaceous rocks in the subsurface (Stone, 2004a).
The Tensleep fault, located in the southern part of the basin, is a major high-angle fault that, according to Allison (1983, 1986), extends from the Precambrian core of the Bighorn Mountains due west about 30 mi where it is obscured by Upper Cretaceous sedimentary rocks (figures 2, 3).
Stone (1969, 1985, 1993, 1999, 2004b) extended the fault into the subsurface across the southern part of the Bighorn Basin to the vicinity of Grass Creek anticline and possibly to the eastern edge of the Absaroka Range, effectively separating the central part of the deep basin trough from the deformed southern margin (figure 3).
The nature of the Tensleep fault is questionable and has been variously described as a near-vertical normal fault, downthrown to the south (Allison, 1983, 1986), and as a left- lateral wrench fault by Stone (1969, 1985, 1993).
Around the margins of the Bighorn Basin are numerous anticlines, many of which are located on the hanging walls of the Rio, Oregon Basin and Line Creek thrust faults (figure 3) (Ver Ploeg, 1985; Blackstone, 1986a,b; Stone, 1985, 2004a).
These folds involve sedimentary rocks ranging from Paleozoic through Paleocene in age, are typically asymmetric, commonly thrust fault-bounded along their steep flanks, and generally trend northwest-southeast.
Blackstone (1986b) believed that many of these features originated as back-limb thrusts on the hanging wall of the Oregon Basin thrust fault.
Many important oil and gas fields are associated with these features-for example, Oregon Basin, Little Buffalo Basin, and Grass Creek fields (figure 1).
The deep central part of the Bighorn Basin is a relatively undeformed area that is bounded by the Oregon Basin fault on the west, the Rio thrust fault on the east, and possibly the western extension of the Tensleep fault on the south (figure 3).
This part of the basin is markedly asymmetric with regional dip to the west where the deep basin axis is adjacent to or overridden by the Oregon Basin thrust fault (fig, 3).
According to Johnson and Finn (1998a), the elevation change at the Teapot Sandstone Member level is about 11,000 ft from east to west.
The most prominent structural feature in the central part of the basin is referred to as the Five Mile trend by Fox and Dolton (1989, 1996), Johnson and Finn (1998a), and Stone (2004b).
It extends about 50 mi northwest across the deep central part of the basin (figure 3).
The Five Mile trend is thrust fault-bounded on its northeast flank, plunges to the northwest and appears to die out in the deep part of the basin.
Important fields along the Five Mile trend include Five Mile and Dobie Creek (figure 1).
