Figure 7 shows the stratigraphic nomenclature used in this report and the change in nomenclature from the Wyoming part of the Bighorn Basin to the Montana part.
The Wyoming nomenclature is from Keefer and others (1998), and the Montana nomenclature is modified from Johnson and Finn (2004) for the area in the vicinity of the Nye-Bowler lineament (figure 1).
The change in nomenclature is also illustrated on the regional cross section in figure 6, and on the north-south stratigraphic cross section presented by Finn (Chapter 6, this CD-ROM).
The basal Cretaceous rocks are represented by the Cloverly Formation, which consists of 210 to 385 ft of interbedded sandstone, variegated shale, claystone, and minor amounts of conglomerate (Keefer and others, 1998) (figure 7).
The basal unit, where present is the Pryor Conglomerate Member, consists of sandstone, conglomeratic sandstone, and black and gray chert-pebble conglomerate and has an irregular distribution.
The middle part of the formation is comprised of variegated shale and claystone interbedded with thin sandstones that accumulated in floodplain, fluvial, and lacustrine environments; Moberly (1960) included these strata in his Little Sheep Mudstone and Himes Members.
These units are overlain by very fine to medium-grained sandstone referred to as the Greybull Sandstone Member (Hintze, 1914; Mills, 1956; Keefer and others, 1998).
The thickness of the Greybull is highly variable, ranging from 5 to 70 ft (Keefer and others, 1998), but is locally absent.
It represents the initial marine transgression during Albian time and is interpreted to be a fluvial/estuarine channel deposit that accumulated in paleovalleys formed on a lowstand surface that developed on the nonmarine part of the Cloverly Formation (Mitchell, 1997; Furer and others, 1997).
The uppermost part of the Cloverly Formation referred to as the "Rusty beds‚Äù by Love and others (1945), as the "Rusty Beds Member"ù by Keefer and others (1998), and in this report as the "rusty beds"ù, consist of finely laminated siltstone and shale with minor thin sandstone beds that accumulated in tidal flats during the continued transgression of the Cretaceous sea during Albian time (Moberly, 1960).
The "rusty beds"ù are included in the lower part of the overlying Thermopolis Shale by numerous authors (for example, Mills, 1956; Eicher, 1962).
The Greybull Sandstone Member and "rusty beds"ù have a combined thickness of about 100 ft throughout most of the basin but range to as much as 160 ft.
These units are referred to together as the Sykes Mountain Formation by Moberly (1960).
Based on fission track dating, the age of the Cloverly Formation ranges from Neocomian to Albian (Heady, 1992; May and others, 1995; Zaleha, 2006).
The Thermopolis Shale (known as the Skull Creek Shale in some other Rocky Mountain Basins), as used in this report, refers to the lower part of the Thermopolis Shale of Lupton (1916), Mills (1956), and Haun and Barlow (1962); it overlies the "rusty beds"ù of the Cloverly Formation and underlies the Muddy Sandstone.
The Thermopolis consists of 125 to 230 ft of marine shales and siltstones and represents continued deposition during sealevel rise in Albian time (Burtner and Warner, 1984; Hagen and Surdam, 1984).
The shales are dark gray to black, organic-rich and contain thin layers of siltstone, sandy claystone, and bentonite.
The basal contact is gradational with the underlying "rusty beds"ù; the upper contact may be sharp and unconformable or gradational with the overlying Muddy Sandstone.
In this report, the Muddy Sandstone refers to a sandstone-dominated interval located stratigraphically between the Thermopolis Shale and the overlying Mowry (Shell Creek) Shale (figure 7).
The unit is between about 7 and 125 ft thick (figure 8) and consists of predominantly sandstone interbedded with lesser amounts of mudrock, and minor amounts of carbonaceous shale and coal.
It is thickest in the southeastern part of the basin where it is dominated by sandstone and thinnest to the north-northwestern part of the basin where it consists of thin sandstones enclosed by marine shale.
The age of the Muddy is latest Albian based on fossil evidence and radiometric dates obtained from strata just above and below the Muddy (Eicher, 1962; Obradovich, 1993).
According to the USGS database on stratigraphic names, the name Muddy was a driller's term for "muddy"ù sands in the Thermopolis Shale of the Bighorn Basin and other areas of Wyoming (Hintze, 1915, page 20-21; Geolex, 2008).
No type area was designated, but a reference section was suggested by Eicher (1960) for exposures near the Greybull field in Bighorn County, Wyoming.
Eicher (1960, 1962) used the term Muddy Sandstone, following previous workers, and provided extensive discussions of the Formation.
Paull (1962) interpreted depositional environments to include deltaic, bar, back-bar, continental, and offshore marine environments.
In their regional study, Dolson and others (1991) considered the Muddy to be a valley-fill complex and interpreted a lowstand shoreline in the vicinity of the Bighorn Basin.
Long (1999) defined two parts to the Muddy, including valley-fill sandstones and shale and trangressive marine sandstone.
In the present study, several cores and outcrops were interpreted to indicate a variety of environments-from freshwater to marine-within a complex valley-fill succession unit that unconformably overlies a lower offshore-marine section, generally included in the Thermopolis Shale.
