Following the regional marine transgression (recorded by deposition of the Knowles Limestone) at the end of the Cotton Valley deposition, fluvial-deltaic systems now forming the Travis Peak Formation prograded basinward across surfaces of the Schuler Formation and Knowles Limestone (figure 4).
Two main Travis Peak fluvial-deltaic depocenters (figure 3) have been documented along the arcuate northern Gulf of Mexico Basin (Saucier, 1985; Tye, 1989).
One depocenter was located in east Texas where the ancestral Red River flowed into the area of the East Texas Basin through a structural downwarp in the Ouachita thrust belt.
The drainage area of the ancestral Red River most likely spanned a large part of the presentday southwestern and midwestern United States.
Coarse clastic sediment was probably derived from highlands in presentday western Utah and southern Arizona.
Triassic red beds were exposed in the provenance area during deposition of the Travis Peak and resulted in abundant red siltstones within the Travis Peak Formation in east Texas (Saucier, 1985).
The second Travis Peak depocenter was situated in an arc that stretched northwestward from southern Mississippi to northeastern Louisiana where the ancestral Mississippi River—which had developed as a major fluvial system during the time of Cotton Valley deposition (Coleman and Coleman, 1981)—continued to transport clastic sediment to constructive, elongate deltas in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico Basin (Reese, 1978; Saucier, 1985; Tye, 1989).
Evidence for the presence of these two depocenters is provided by sandstone isopach patterns from Saucier (1985), who divided the Travis Peak section at its midpoint and mapped gross sandstone thickness of the lower and upper parts of the formation.
The Travis Peak Formation is not divided formally into members.
However, Saucier (1985) and Saucier and others (1985) distinguished three separate stratigraphic intervals within the Travis Peak across east Texas and northern Louisiana on the basis of relative amounts of sandstone and shale, as reflected in the resistivity and gamma-ray character of sandstones on wireline logs.
A basal interval of mixed sandstones and shales interpreted as delta-fringe deposits is gradationally overlain by a thick, sandstone-rich interval of fluvial and floodplain deposits that grades upward into another interval of coastal-plain sandstone and mudstone (figures 5 and 6; Saucier, 1985; Fracasso and others, 1988; Tye, 1989, 1991).
The middle fluvial and floodplain interval—which is the thickest interval and forms the bulk of the Travis Peak—consists of stacked, aggradational, braided-channel sandstones that grade upward into more isolated meandering-channel sandstone deposits (figure 6).
Sandstones are interpreted as braided, on the basis of blocky SP (spontaneous potential) curves, bed-forms observed in conventional cores, and sandstone-body geometries.
Stacked, braided channel units generally are 12–45 ft thick, but because of the absence of preserved shales, amalgamated channel sandstones occur in places as massive-sandstone units as much as 250 ft thick with blocky SP curves (Saucier, 1985).
The thick middle fluvial and floodplain interval gradationally overlies a much thinner basal interval with considerably higher mudstone content in which discrete sandstones are separated by thicker mudstones.
Sandstones in this lower Travis Peak interval are interpreted as delta-fringe deposits.
The middle fluvial and floodplain interval grades upward into the third interval recognized by Saucier (1985), which forms the uppermost part of the Travis Peak.
Like the lower Travis Peak delta-fringe interval, this upper interval is characterized by discrete sandstones separated by thicker mudstones.
Many sandstones in the upper interval display thin, spiky, upward-coarsening or upward-fining serrated SP signatures, which are interpreted as coastal-plain deposits.
Upper Travis Peak coastal units interfinger with, and are gradationally overlain by, shallow-marine shelf carbonates of the Sligo Formation (Fracasso and others, 1988).
Sligo carbonates thin updip to the northwest as they lap onto Travis Peak coastal deposits.
Contact of the Travis Peak with the overlying Sligo Formation, therefore, is time transgressive.
South of the main area of Travis Peak fluvial-deltaic sedimentation, in the region of the Early Cretaceous (Comanchean) shelf edge (figure 3), a slope-basin sandstone trend has been proposed by Zimmerman and Goddard (2001) on the basis of limited well data to the north of this trend in shelf-slope facies.
This slope-basin sandstone trend includes an area of as much as 5,600 mi2 where sand was transported downslope from the shelf and slope areas to the north.
Through the use of well-log interpretations, they identified four facies according to relative amounts of siltstone, shale, and sandstone that they attributed to turbidite deposition.
Their shaly sandstone facies included massive-sandstone bodies as thick as 20–60 ft encased in thick basinal shales.
