Exploratory drilling in the North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS began in 1963, and during the following year several gas fields were discovered in the northern part of the basin (figure 1).
Some of these fields have produced gas since the late 1960’s; others have not been developed, apparently because of economic considerations (Abdulin and others, 1993).
A few oil accumulations in this TPS were discovered during the late 1960’s and in 1970’s.
Only two small gas fields in the southeastern part of the TPS were found during the last decade.
All hydrocarbon discoveries in the North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS are located in three areas.
Three oil fields in the western part of the TPS, and one oil field and several gas fields in the southeastern part of the TPS, are in Jurassic clastic reservoirs at depths commonly greater than 3,000 m.
Gas fields in the northern part of the TPS are relatively large; their combined original reserves are about 1 trillion cubic feet (TCF).
The fields are in Eocene sandstones at depths of only a few hundred meters.
Gas in the northern gas fields is dry.
The hydrocarbon components of the gas are methane and very small amounts of ethane.
Heavier hydrocarbon gases are absent.
Lower–Middle Jurassic rocks at the base of the North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS compose a continental, coal-bearing, clastic formation.
Coarse and marine clastic lithologies commonly are arranged in cycles that include alluvial and lacustrine rocks and coal beds.
The presence of nearshore marine facies in the Bathonian section is possible.
The thickness of Lower–Middle Jurassic rocks in depressions exceeds 1,000 m, and it decreases to 500–700 m on regional highs (Ozdoev, 1977).
Upper Jurassic rocks are 100– 300 m thick.
They consist of Callovian-Oxfordian marine shales and a bed of Kimmeridgian-Tithonian limestone that is 50–100 m thick.
The Cretaceous section in the TPS area is thick.
In the Kosbulak depression (figure 2), the maximum thickness is 2,600 m, and thickness decreases to 1,200–1,400 m on the crests of the southern system of uplifts.
Cretaceous rocks are primarily marine clastics.
The Barremian Stage is represented by continental variegated rocks that record a relatively short regression event.
Beds of limestone, chalk, and marl constitute much of the Campanian-Maastrichtian section.
The Tertiary sequence is separated into two parts by a pronounced pre­middle Miocene unconformity.
Paleocene–lower Miocene rocks are thick (maximum 1,400 m in the Kosbulak depression) marine sandstones and shales that include carbonate beds.
The middle Miocene–Pliocene sequence is comparatively thin; it is composed of clastic rocks and widespread Sarmatian-Pontian limestones and marls.
Source rocks for the North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS probably are continental coaly shales and coals in the Middle Jurassic sequence.
The sporadic presence of lacustrine beds that are relatively enriched in type II kerogen is probable.
Total organic carbon (TOC) in some samples of shales exceeded 4 percent (Ozdoev, 1977).
The TOC contents are significantly lower in Lower Jurassic rocks, as well as in the Upper Jurassic and Neocomian rocks.
In most of the TPS area, Middle Jurassic strata are in the oil window, and possibly also in the upper part of the gas window.
The main stage of maturation took place in Tertiary time.
Oil and gas fields in the Jurassic section are in Middle Jurassic continental and upper Callovian-Oxfordian shallow-marine clastic rocks.
Middle Jurassic sandstones that occur at depths exceeding 2,500 m are characterized by relatively poor reservoir properties.
Porosity of the sandstones ranges from 8 to 14 percent and permeability ranges from a few millidarcies to several tens of millidarcies.
Commonly, sandstone beds are laterally discontinuous.
Callovian reservoir rocks that are commercially productive in one field are of somewhat better quality; porosity is 16–18 percent and permeability is as high as 100 mD.
Eocene sandstones that contain dry gas of uncertain origin in northern areas of the TPS occur at depths of several hundred meters.
Their reservoir properties are excellent; porosity commonly exceeds 30 percent and permeability is several hundred millidarcies.
All known hydrocarbon accumulations in the North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS are in structural traps, although outlines of particular pools commonly are affected by pinchout of sandstones and by faults.
The traps are local anticlinal uplifts with closures of several tens of meters to 150 m.
Average sizes of anticlines are 5–8 km in width by 10–20 km in length.
The anticlines are gentle structures; their limbs dip at angles of a few degrees in Jurassic rocks to tens of minutes in Tertiary rocks.
Kimmeridgian shales and carbonates constitute a regional seal that is highly effective over most of the TPS area.
The effectiveness of the seal is demonstrated by the virtual absence of oil or gas shows in Neocomian sandstone beds that alternate with shales.
The timing of structural growth is not certain.
Limited data and analogy with the South Mangyshlak subbasin suggest that important stages of formation of structures could have been associated with pre-Cretaceous, pre-Tertiary, and pre-middle Miocene erosional events that are reflected by unconformities.
The North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS includes a single assessment unit, Jurassic-Tertiary Reservoirs AU (11500201).
The petroleum potential of the AU probably is low (table 1).
Approximately 30 to 40 prospects, mainly in Jurassic rocks, have been drilled, but only several small oil and gas fields were found.
The negative characteristics of the AU are the poor quality of Middle Jurassic reservoir rocks and the apparent low effectiveness of source rocks.
Several tens of structural prospects identified by seismic surveys more than two decades ago (Ozdoev, 1977), still have not been tested, and reconstructed paleogeographic conditions of sedimentation in Jurassic time suggest that many stratigraphic traps probably are present.
However, because of the generally negative results of previous exploration in Jurassic rocks and the relatively large drilling depths, these prospects are unattractive at the present time.
The potential for additional shallow gas discoveries in Eocene reservoir rocks apparently also is limited.
Although specific data are not available, most significant structural prospects that occur at depths of only 400–700 m probably have been tested in areas adjacent to the discoveries.
South of those areas, Eocene sandstones pinch out and the Paleogene sequence is composed entirely of shales.
New discoveries may be expected in smaller structural and stratigraphic traps.
