The province is an arcuate, north-south-trending structural feature covering approximately 15,000 sq mi that extends from the Uinta Mountains on the south to the Teton Range and Snake River Plain on the north, encompassing parts of Wyoming, Utah, and Idaho.
It is an easterly bulge, or salient, of the greater Cordilleran Thrust Belt of western North America that stretches over 5,000 mi from Alaska to Mexico.
The wide axis of the thrust belt is roughly coincident with the eastern hingeline of a Paleozoic and Mesozoic miogeocline whose depocenter was located in southeastern Idaho, where more than 60,000 ft of predominantly marine sediments of Paleozoic and Mesozoic age were deposited.
This sequence was strongly folded and thrust eastward starting in latest Jurassic time in the west and ending possibly as late as Eocene time in the east, followed later by extensional faulting from Eocene to the present.
The resulting transition from a thick marine section on the west to a thinner shelf section to the east provides an optimum setting for migration of hydrocarbons from source rocks to updip reservoir rocks in structural traps formed by the thrusting.
Four major thrust systems make up the present structural setting of the province, two of which form its western and eastern boundaries.
From west to east these thrust systems are the Willard-Paris, Crawford-Meade, Absaroka, and Prospect-Darby-Hogsback.
Thrust faults are low-angle and moderately to highly imbricated, and do not involve crystalline basement, except in the area of the Moxa Arch extension.
Productive traps found on three of the major thrust systems are in complexly faulted, upright to nearly recumbent folds.
Twenty-nine oil and gas fields, 24 of which are currently productive, have been discovered in the province in traps of this type since the initial discovery at Pineview field in 1975, although exploration dates as far back as the 1890’s.
Cumulative production from these fields, five of which are giant fields, to the end of 1992 was 253 MMBO and 5.1 TCFG.
Seismic exploration, drilling, and new field discoveries have been heavily concentrated in the southernmost one-fourth of the province area ("Fossil basin" area); this is due mainly to the availability of access on land-grant (Union Pacific Railroad) and other private lands in this area.
The northern three-fourths of the province has undergone minimal exploration and drilling, most of which is in small, scattered clusters of activity.
The areal patterns of the six conventional plays individually assessed in the province are constrained mainly by the linear configuration of the major thrust systems; the plays are discussed in the following sequence: Moxa Arch Extension Play (3601), Crawford-Meade Thrusts Play (3602), Northern Thrusts Play (3603), Absaroka Thrust Play (3604), Hogsback Thrust Play (3606), and Cretaceous Stratigraphic Play (3607).
No unconventional plays were defined in this province.
