The hypothetical Lower Cretaceous Composite Oil play comprises two units in the South Florida Basin: the Lehigh Acres Formation brown dolomite zone and a potentially porous dolomite unit within the underlying Pumpkin Bay Formation (figure 2).
Both units in this play are believed to contain oil mainly derived from organic-rich beds in the upper part of the Pumpkin Bay Formation.
The play is divided into two separate areas: one is centered in Lee County and intersects the Sunniland trend, and the other is centered near the Marquesas Keys) (figure 8).
The northern part (Lee County and vicinity) includes the area (outlined by Applegate, 1987) containing porous brown dolomite and an area within the Pumpkin Bay Formation that contains live oil in porous dolomite (6–16 percent porosity).
The section is thickest (as much as 1,200 ft thick, as measured from reference wells in State waters near Charlotte Harbor and onshore in Collier and Hendry Counties) in these areas and has good to excellent source-rock potential (determined from geochemical and thermal-maturity measurements) (Means, 1977; Applegate and others, 1981; Palacas and others, 1981; Attilio and Blake, 1983; Faulkner and Applegate, 1986; Applegate, 1987; Montgomery, 1987).
The rocks of the northern area (figure 8) possess high porosity caused by epigenetic dolomitization in an active geothermal lineament system (Saul, 1987).
Several oil shows were reported in thick, porous dolomite beds in the southern part of the play centered near Marquesas Keys (Faulkner and Applegate, 1986; Lloyd, 1992).
The informally named brown dolomite zone refers to a dolomite unit commonly found within the Twelve Mile Member of the Lower Cretaceous Lehigh Acres Formation (Aptian).
The brown dolomite lies about 300 ft below the base of the Punta Gorda Anhydrite and about 1,000 ft below the Sunniland Formation (figure 2).
The unit is best developed onshore in Charlotte County and surrounding counties where it is thickest (about 100 ft) and most porous (10–22 percent) and at a depth of about 12,000 ft (figure 8).
Good oil shows were reported in this unit, and because it is about 1,000 ft lower in the stratigraphic section than the Sunniland Formation, oil from the brown dolomite is predicted to have a higher API gravity (20°–50°?) and higher thermal maturity than oil from the Sunniland Formation.
Reservoirs consist of sucrosic dolomite and exhibit pinpoint to vuggy porosity in beds at least 50 ft below the top of the Twelve Mile Member of the Lehigh Acres Formation.
As much as 50 ft of porous dolomite have been found onshore where the brown dolomite zone reaches a maximum thickness of about 100 ft.
An onshore area (in Charlotte, Lee, Hendry, Collier, Highlands, and Glades Counties, and adjacent State waters) with the highest resource potential is defined by the porous zones delineated by Applegate (1987).
Good oil shows were observed in dolomite penetrated by the Bass Collier 12-2 well in Collier County; porosities determined from a sonic log ranged from 10 to 22 percent and core porosities were as high as 18 volume percent.
State and Federal waters are predicted to have high resource potential.
In particular, oil stains were noted in about 350 ft of mostly porous dolomite penetrated by wells located near the Marquesas Keys (Faulkner and Applegate, 1986; Lloyd, 1992).
The thickest and deepest sedimentary interval with significant reservoir potential in the South Florida Basin is the Lower Cretaceous Pumpkin Bay Formation.
The formation is composed of limestone, except at its northern limit where dolomite is the dominant lithology.
Within Province 50, the Pumpkin Bay Formation is as much as 1,200 ft thick in offshore Florida State waters of Charlotte Harbor; the formation is projected to thicken westward in Federal offshore waters and into the basin depocenter (Faulkner and Applegate, 1986).
Onshore, the Pumpkin Bay Formation is found at present depths from about 12,500 to 14,000 ft.
Core porosities for rocks of the Pumpkin Bay Formation are as high as 20 percent, and sonic well-log porosities are slightly higher.
Porosities are generally lower in the Pumpkin Bay Formation than in potential reservoirs found in younger units.
Generally, rocks with the highest resource potential in the Pumpkin Bay Formation are located in the Pulley Ridge area of Federal offshore waters (Faulkner and Applegate, 1986).
Projections indicate that the formation is as much as 1,500 ft thick in this area and that the best reservoirs exist within a thick porous dolomite zone (300–350 ft thick; pinpoint to vuggy porosity as high as 25 percent) in the middle and upper parts of the formation; depths range from about 12,500 ft to more than 15,000 ft.
Source-rock studies by Palacas and others (1981) indicate that organic-rich beds in the upper Pumpkin Bay Formation are likely source rocks for oils.
These oils could be trapped in reservoirs that exist within the middle and upper parts of the Pumpkin Bay and in the porous brown dolomite zone.
Palacas and others (1981) identified organic-rich, argillaceous carbonate beds with high (0.43–3.2 weight percent) TOC in the upper Pumpkin Bay and concluded that these beds had the greatest petroleum-generating potential of all rocks older than the Punta Gorda Anhydrite.
The TOC contents of these rocks, however, vary within the basin.
Most rocks within the Twelve Mile Member of the Lehigh Acres Formation contain insufficient organic matter (average of about 0.3 percent TOC) to have generated commercial amounts of petroleum.
Some richer source beds are present within this unit, however, having marginal (about 0.5 percent TOC) to good source potential.
Particularly, more than 2.0 percent TOC is contained in a relatively thin (about 1 ft thick) limestone bed in the West Felda field.
The thermal-maturation level for oil generation is higher in this play than that for the upper and lower Sunniland plays (5001 and 5002).
Thus, oils of this play are expected to be marginally to moderately mature and to have higher API gravities (25° to 50°) and higher GOR’s than Sunniland oils.
Total mean volume of undiscovered oil in the Lower Cretaceous Carbonate Composite Oil play was estimated at about 11 MMBO.
The median number of new discoveries is eight accumulations having a median field size of 2 MMBO (table 1).
