The Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province borders the eastern .ank of the Andes Mountains (Fig. 1).
This province is an asymmetric foreland basin that covers about 320,000 square kilometers (km2 )(124,000 square miles (mi2)) (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
The names of individual parts of the basin are based on political boundaries with the Putumayo Basin situated in Colombia, the Oriente Basin in Ecuador, and the Maranon Basin in Peru.
The area of the Oriente Basin is greater than 80,000 km2 (31,000 mi2) (White and others, 1995).
The Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon foreland basin is bounded on the west by a 50–200 km (30–125 mi) wide sub-Andean belt of thrusted Mesozoic sedimentary rocks (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
This belt includes the Garzon Massif, the Central and Western Cordillera, and the Santiago and Huallaga Basins (Fig. 1).
Northern border of the Putumayo Basin portion is the Macarena uplift, which separates it from the Llanos Basin.
The Guyana Shield and Solimoes Basin border the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province on the east.
The Maranon Basin is bounded on the south by the Ucayali and Acre Basins (Fig. 1).
Much of the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province is covered by rain forests of the upper Amazon River drainage basin.
The province’s location within the rain forest, coupled with the economics of the region, makes access dif.cult, and complicates any potential plans for road building, development of petroleum storage, transport, and re.ning facilities, and construction of housing and other infrastructure.
Environmental impacts that are associated with exploration and production of oil and gas in the rain forest can include primary deforestation that results from construction of facilities, such as roads, housing, drill pads, and power supplies, and secondary deforestation, which is primarily due to colonization as the rain forest becomes more accessible.
Endeavors to minimize impacts include (1) Occidental Exploration and Production Company’s use of satellite and remote sensing imagery to assess and control potential areas of deforestation on their 200,000 km2 (77,000 mi2) lease block in the Oriente Basin of Ecuador—a study indicated that the amount of deforestation over a 10-year period was 6 percent outside the lease block and 3.2 percent within it (Groth, 1998; Occidental, 1999); (2) Shell Prospecting and Development’s Amazon basin drilling projects; use of helirigs instead of building roads to the prospects, to minimize both land impact and access to these remote sites (Wasserstrom and Reider, 1998); and (3) agreement by Royal Dutch/Shell, Mobil Corporation, and ARCO to allow nongovernment organizations and Indian groups to monitor the environment during exploration and development programs in Ecuador and Peru (Wasserstrom and Reider, 1998).
Environmental organizations also have websites that discuss potential environmental impacts of exploration and development within the region.
The petroleum system approach to determining oil and gas resources integrates information about tectonic, depositional, and diagenetic factors that control hydrocarbon generation, migration, and accumulation in reservoirs.
Initial assignment of formations to petroleum systems is based on whether they have the same hydrocarbon source rock(s).
It is assumed that the formations are oil and (or) gas productive or potentially productive.
This method of resource assessment is used to quantify current and estimated ultimate reserves at basin scales, and to estimate potential for additional oil and gas from unexplored and underexplored areas.
This study divides the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province into two Total Petroleum Systems—Mesozoic-Cenozoic (604101) and Paleozoic (604102).
Assessment units for these systems are named and numbered as follows: Hollin-Napo (60410101), Basin-Center Gas (60410102), and Permian Ene Formation (60410201).
All current production and estimated reserves within the province are from the Hollin-Napo assessment unit of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic system.
Subsurface extent of the area that may contain potential reservoir formations is highly generalized in Figure 1, primarily because of lack of data.
The Basin-Center Gas assessment unit is hypothetical and is based upon similarities of structural and depositional histories and of characteristics of Cretaceous source rock and potential reservoirs between this basin and other basins that contain basin-center gas fields.
The Paleozoic TPS is also hypothetical because no oil or gas has been produced from strata of Paleozoic age in the province; however, published and other information indicates the presence of Paleozoic-sourced oil in several Cretaceous reservoirs of the Maranon Basin in Peru.
Some reservoirs may be present in the western part of this basin, particularly in structural and combination traps below the Triassic salt (Fig. 2), but because the subsurface extent of the area that may contain Paleozoic reservoirs is unknown, none is shown in Figure 1.
The boundary of this Paleozoic TPS (604102) is generalized to that of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic system (Fig. 1).
The primary sources of information regarding subsurface distribution of formations, including reservoir and source rock facies, are Mathalone and Montoya (1995) and Pindell and Tabbutt (1995).
