Although clean, coastal Travis Peak Formation sandstones at any given depth have an order-of-magnitude poorer permeability than clean, fluvial sandstones, most hydrocarbon production from the Travis Peak in east Texas has come from coastal and high-sinuosity fluvial sandstones in the upper 300 ft of the formation (Fracasso and others, 1988; Dutton, Laubach, Tye, and others, 1991; Dutton and others, 1993).
Multistory and multilateral fluvial-channel belts afford a highly interconnected network of sandstones that provides effective migration pathways for hydrocarbons.
Additionally, hydrocarbon migration through this sandstone network is enhanced by the presence of natural fractures, which are significantly more abundant in the quartz-cemented, sandstone-rich, low-sinuosity fluvial sequence than in overlying paralic sandstones (Dutton, Laubach, Tye, and others, 1991).
Consequently, most hydrocarbons migrating upward into the Travis Peak Formation may have passed through the sandstone-rich fluvial section and were subsequently trapped in upper Travis Peak coastal and high-sinuosity, fluvial sandstones, which are encased in mudstones that provide effective hydrocarbon seals.
Primary reservoirs within the coastal sequence include tidal-channel and tidal-flat sandstones and high-sinuosity, fluvial-channel sandstones deposited in coastal-plain settings (Tye, 1989; Dutton, Laubach, and Tye, 1991).
Bartberger and others (2002) have given a detailed discussion of the sedimentology and reservoir character of Travis Peak sandstones.
In east Texas, Travis Peak sandstones have had a complex diagenetic history involving (1) mechanical compaction, (2) precipitation of cements and authigenic minerals, including dolomite, quartz, illite, chlorite, and ankerite, (3) generation of secondary porosity through dissolution of feldspar, and (4) formation of reservoir bitumen (Dutton and Diggs, 1992).
Loss of primary porosity in near-surface settings following deposition was negligible in most fluvial sandstones.
Minor porosity loss occurred in coastal sandstones from precipitation of dolomite cement.
From surface deposition to a burial depth of about 3,000 ft, Travis Peak sandstones lost primary porosity mainly through mechanical compaction.
Further compaction was halted by extensive quartz cementation that occurred between depths of 3,000 and 5,000 ft.
The next significant diagenetic event was the creation of secondary porosity through dissolution of feldspar.
Additional minor porosity reduction occurred to a depth of about 7,500 ft from precipitation of authigenic chlorite, illite, and ankerite.
Sandstones on higher parts of the Sabine uplift did not undergo further porosity reduction from cementation.
However, in Travis Peak sandstones buried below about 8,000 ft on the west flank of the uplift, a second episode of extensive quartz cementation occurred in which silica was generated from pressure solution associated with development of stylolites.
A late-stage diagenetic event that significantly reduced porosity and permeability in some Travis Peak sandstones in east Texas was the formation of reservoir bitumen (Dutton, Laubach, Tye, and others, 1991; Lomando, 1992).
Reservoir bitumen is a solid hydrocarbon that lines and fills both primary and secondary pores in Travis Peak sandstones.
Formation of reservoir bitumen occurred after precipitation of quartz and ankerite cement (Dutton, Laubach, Tye, and others, 1991), and its occurrence is limited to primarily coastal sandstones within the upper 300 ft of the Travis Peak Formation.
Among sandstones in the upper Travis Peak that contain reservoir bitumen, average and maximum bulk volumes of bitumen are 4 percent and 19 percent, respectively.
Geochemical analyses suggest that reservoir bitumen formed from (to use the term of Dutton and others) “deasphalting” of oil trapped in pores of upper Travis Peak sandstones (Rogers and others, 1974; Dutton, Laubach, Tye, and others, 1991; Dutton, Laubach, and Tye, 1991).
The oil probably was similar to oil currently being produced from some Travis Peak sandstone reservoirs in fields in east Texas.
According to Tissot and Welte (1978), deasphalting commonly occurs in medium to heavy oil when large amounts of gas dissolve into the oil.
Gas that dissolves into an oil to cause deasphalting can be generated from either thermal alteration of the oil itself or introduction of gas from outside the reservoir.
The level of kerogen maturity in mudstones interbedded with Travis Peak sandstone reservoirs suggests that oils in Travis Peak sandstones were subjected to temperatures sufficient to generate gas internally (Dutton, 1987).
