The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) completed an assessment of the undiscovered oil and gas potential of the U.S. portions of the Appalachian Basin and the Michigan Basin in 2002 and 2004, respectively.
Following the assessments of these two basins, oil and gas allocations were assigned to the U.S. portions of the Great Lakes (figure 1) — Lake Superior (Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin), Lake Michigan (Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin), Lake Huron (Michigan), Lake Erie (Michigan, New York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania), and Lake Ontario (New York).
Allocations for Lake St. Clair (Michigan) were included with those of Lake Erie.
The eight total petroleum systems identified in the U.S. portions of the Great Lakes are the (1) Precambrian Nonesuch TPS, (2) Ordovician Foster TPS, (3) [Ordovician] Utica-Lower Paleozoic TPS, (4) Ordovician to Devonian Composite TPS, (5) Silurian Niagara/Salina TPS, (6) Devonian Antrim TPS, (7) Devonian Shale-Middle and Upper Paleozoic TPS, and (8) Pennsylvanian Saginaw TPS.
Each TPS is named according to the petroleum source rock(s) of that system.
For most of the systems, each TPS is associated with only one source rock.
The Ordovician to Devonian Composite TPS, however, is a composite petroleum system having contributions from one or more of the following different source rocks: Ordovician Collingwood Shale, Devonian Detroit River Group, and Devonian Antrim Shale.
For the U.S. portions of the Great Lakes, the USGS estimated the following quantities of undiscovered, technically recoverable oil and gas resources (table 1): a mean value of 312 million barrels of oil, a mean value of 5.2 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, and a mean value of 122 million barrels of natural gas liquids.
These estimates are mean estimates.
The ranges of uncertainty of these estimates are shown in table 1.
The only identified petroleum system beneath Lake Superior is the Precambrian Nonesuch TPS, which lacked sufficient data to assess quantitatively.
The only identified petroleum system in the Minnesota portion of the Great Lakes is the Precambrian Nonesuch TPS, which lacked sufficient data to assess quantitatively.
