More than 2.88 billion barrels of oil (BBO) and 660 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG) have been produced from the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province in eastern Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru.
Estimated undiscovered recoverable resources at the 5 to 95 percent con.dence levels for all petroleum systems in the province range from 1,030 to 6,060 BBO, 236 to 4,600 BCFG, and 4 to 182 MMBNGL.
This is one of the major geologic provinces for which undiscovered oil and gas resources were assessed for the World Energy Assessment Project of the U.S. Geological Survey.
Reservoirs in this province that produce from Upper Cretaceous and Tertiary sandstones have as much as 2.84 BBO and 616 BCFG cumulative production from 150 fields; reservoirs from 65 fields that list Lower Cretaceous production have cumulative recovery of as much as 1.16 BBO and 448 BCFG.
The sum of these production figures is more than the basin total, largely because 43 of the more than 172 oil fields in the basin list recovery from both Lower and Upper Cretaceous reservoirs and reported production is commingled.
The main oil and gas reservoirs for the Putumayo Basin in Colombia are in the Cretaceous Caballos and Villeta Formations and the Tertiary Pepino Formation.
Ecuador’s Oriente Basin production is mostly from sandstones of the Cretaceous Hollin and Napo Formations, and Peru’s Maranon Basin reservoirs are sandstones of the Cretaceous Cushabatay, Agua Caliente, Chonta, and Vivian Formations.
These formations are grouped into the Hollin-Napo assessment unit of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic TPS because of similarities in structural, depositional, and diagenetic histories for source and reservoir rocks.
Although no production exists from Jurassic and Triassic formations, marine shales within the Triassic and Jurassic Pucara Group and Jurassic Sarayaquillo Group are thermally mature for oil and (or) gas generation throughout much of the region and Jurassic-age source rocks in the southern Maranon Basin may lie within the gas generative window.
For the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province, estimated recoverable oil is 6.62 BBO, and estimated ultimate recoverable oil plus gas and condensate is 6.89 billion barrels of oil equivalent for all fields and formations of the Hollin-Napo assessment unit of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic TPS.
Oil from Cretaceous rocks of the Corrientes and several other fields in the Maranon Basin may have been sourced from the Permian Ene Formation with migration updip along local fault systems.
This formation is thermally mature for oil generation across the western third of the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province, and probably mature for gas generation in areas close to the western boundary.
Some potential exists for field discoveries within the Ene Formation or other units of the Permian Mitu Group in the southern portion of the province.
A thick interval of Triassic salt in the western Maranon Basin is a potential seal and may have contributed to possible structural traps; stratigraphic and combination traps may also occur.
Primary petroleum source rocks of Cretaceous age are marine and mixed marine-terrestrial shales of the Caballos Formation and the “U” sandstone of the Villeta Formation in the Putumayo Basin, the Hollin and Napo Formations in the Oriente Basin, and the Raya and Chonta Formations in the Maranon Basin.
Possible source rocks in the Maranon Basin are the Permian Ene Formation, the Triassic and Jurassic Pucara Group, and the Jurassic Sarayaquillo Groupage The Pucara Group is a sig­nificant potential source of hydrocarbon in the Ucayali Basin, which is located at the southern border of the Maranon Basin.
Cretaceous source rocks are currently thermally mature for oil generation over the western third of the province, and possibly for gas generation in an area close to the western boundary of the Oriente and Maranon Basins.
If these source rocks are thermally mature for gas generation, then some potential exists for gas reserves within low-permeability sandstone facies from nearshore marine and shoreface sandstones of the Cretaceous Napo, Chonta, and Agua Caliente Formations of the hypothetical Basin-Center Gas assessment unit.
