The Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System extends from northern Tunisia to offshore Libya, from the northwest to the southeast portion of the Pelagian Province (figures 1 and 2).
This total petroleum system and corresponding assessment unit generally coincide with the potential extent of petroleum being generated by, and migrating from, Eocene (Bou Dabbous) source rocks.
Where present, the Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene El Haria mudstone separates this total petroleum system from the underlying Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System.
An events chart (figure 7) summarizes the ages of source, reservoir, and seal rocks; the timing of trap development; and generation and migration of petroleum.
Eocene extension and fault reactivation controlled the distribution of depositional facies of the Metlaoui Group (Morgan and others, 1998).
Neogene subsidence resulted in deposition of turbidite-fan deposits and invoked maturation of Cretaceous and Eocene source rocks and petroleum migration (Bédir and others, 1992).
Petroleum migration most likely occurred from late Miocene to Quaternary (Bédir and others, 1992).
Potential traps for petroleum accumulations were developed in the late Miocene and Quaternary as a result of compression by reactivating older structures (Bédir and others, 1992).
Several fields with reported production from Oligocene and Miocene reservoirs exist in the Gulf of Hammamet where the Bou Dabbous source rocks have not been mapped (figures 2, 4, and 8).
Although the Bou Dabbous Formation is assumed to be the most likely source rock, Cretaceous source rocks may have been a major supply of petroleum to these fields.
If this is the case, then a portion of the discovered and undiscovered petroleum included with the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System (approximately 8 to 10 percent of the known oil and 3 to 5 percent of the known gas; approximately 10 to 25 percent of the undiscovered oil and 5 to 25 percent of the undiscovered gas) should be included with the Jurassic-Cretaceous Total Petroleum System.
The primary source rock is dark-brown marl and mudstone of the lower Eocene (Ypresian) Bou Dabbous Formation (or lateral equivalents) (Macgregor and Moody, 1998; Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
Various authors have mapped the extent of the Bou Dabbous Formation differently (compare figures 4 and 8).
However, this formation generally follows an arcuate and elongate trend extending from the northwest to the southeast portions of the province (figure 2).
The Bou Dabbous Formation contains type I and II kerogen and ranges in thickness from 50 to 300 m (Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
Total organic carbon content (TOC) of the Bou Dabbous ranges from 0.4 to 4 percent, and maturation is described as early mature to mature (Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
This source rock most likely became mature in the Miocene to Pleistocene (Bédir and others, 1992), and the generated petroleum migrated laterally into adjacent, juxtaposed reservoirs and vertically along faults or fractures.
The API gravity of oil generated from the Bou Dabbous source rock ranges from 18º to 53º; the mean is 36º (Petrocon­sultants, 1996a; GeoMark, 1998).
Sulfur content ranges from 0.2 to 0.6 percent; the mean is 0.4 percent (GeoMark, 1998).
Overburden rocks are variable across the Pelagian Province area mainly due to erosion and nondeposition during the Oligocene and Pliocene deformation (figure 5C).
Eocene, Miocene, and Pliocene rocks make up most of the overburden.
In some areas, large portions of the Paleogene section (Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene) were removed by erosion during pre-Miocene deformation (figure 5C).
Smaller portions of Miocene rocks were removed, in turn, by erosion before and during the Pliocene.
Both Mesozoic and Cenozoic rocks are thickest in the Ashtart-Tripolitania Basin and in the central part of the Gulf of Hammamet.
A Quaternary section of variable thickness covers much of the area.
Known reservoir rocks include members of the lower Eocene Metlaoui Group (the laterally equivalent members of Bou Dabbous Formation), such as the El Garia fractured limestone; Jirani dolostone, Jdeir limestone, and Reineche limestone, as well as the Oligocene to Miocene Ketatna limestone and the middle Miocene Aïn Grab limestone and Birsa sandstone.
The Oligocene to Miocene Fortuna sandstone may be a potential reservoir.
Figure 8 shows the distribution of the Metlaoui Group reservoirs and source rock, as well as locations of fields having reported oil and gas in reservoirs of the Bou Dab­bous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System.
Names of laterally equivalent rock units are given in figure 6, and known reservoir properties are given in table 2.
Volumetrically, most of the discovered petroleum, as of 1996, is in Metlaoui Group reservoirs (approximately 1,900 MMBO and 15,000 BCFG), although a significant volume of petroleum was discovered in Miocene-age reservoirs (approximately 175 MMBO and 400 BCFG).
Seals include Eocene and Miocene mudstone and carbonate rocks (compact micrite, for example) (Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
Mudstone of the Cherahil and Souar Formations and their lateral equivalents provide seals for many of the Eocene reservoirs (Macgregor and Moody, 1998).
Generally, traps were developed by the formation of horst blocks and associated pinchouts during the Cretaceous to Paleocene, by reactivation of these horsts during the Miocene to Quaternary (figure 9A), and by folding and subsequent faulting (figure 9B) (Bédir and others, 1992; Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
Most of the discovered oil and gas fields (having reported petroleum in reservoirs within the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System as of 1996) are associated with low-amplitude anticlines, high-amplitude anticlines associated with reverse faults (inversion anticlines), wrench fault structures, and stratigraphic features (Petroconsult­ants, 1996a; Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
Accumulations in combination structural-stratigraphic traps are also common.
Potential traps may be associated with salt ridges and diapirs (Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999), as well as Paleogene stratigraphic pinchouts and turbidites above and below the Oligocene Unconformity (Bédir and others, 1992).
The locations of major faults (mostly extensional) and major anticlines in Tunisia and offshore areas to the east, as well as field locations, are shown in figure 10.
Fault systems in the Gulf of Gabes area trend generally northwest-to-southeast, whereas fault systems in the Gulf of Hammamet area trend generally west-to-east.
One assessment unit was identified for the Bou Dabbous– Tertiary Total Petroleum System, the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Structural/Stratigraphic Assessment Unit (20480101) (figure 2).
As of 1996, forty-six fields reported petroleum volumes in reservoirs of the corresponding total petroleum system, and these fields are allocated to this assessment unit.
Of these, 27 are oil fields, 14 are gas fields, and 5 felds are not classified because they contained less than 1 MMBOE.
Combined, these fields contained 2,114 MMBO, 15,509 BCFG, and 44 MMBNGL, as known volumes (table 1) (Petroconsultants, 1996a).
Minimum field sizes of 4 MMBO and 24 BCFG were chosen for this assessment unit based on the field-size distribution of discovered fields.
At the end of 1995, the exploration density was approximately 15 new-field wildcat wells per 10,000 km2.
Exploration activity was not consistent through time, peaking from the 1970’s to the early 1980’s, and experiencing a resurgence starting in the early 1990’s.
Exploration appears to be in a moderately mature stage across much of the area.
The overall success rate has been approximately 26 discoveries per 100 new-field wildcat wells (or about one discovery per four new-field wildcat wells).
As of 1996, offshore fields existed in water depths that range from about 4 to 350 m, averaging about 135 m.
The sizes of oil and gas fields discovered have generally decreased through time and with respect to exploration activity.
Trends in field sizes or number of discoveries with respect to exploration activity (number of new-field wildcat wells drilled) are not apparent.
Plots showing exploration activity and discovery history are presented in Appendix 1.
Exploration of structural and combination traps is expected to continue, and many more fields, both oil and gas, could be discovered.
Discoveries in structural and stratigraphic traps involving the Metlaoui Group reservoirs are likely to be smaller than existing accumulations, whereas discoveries in the Birsa sandstone may contribute larger volumes to reserves than in the past.
Stratigraphic traps involving the Fortuna sandstone and lateral equivalents may also contain important accumulations.
This study estimates that about one-half of the total number of fields (discovered and undiscovered) of at least the minimum size has been discovered.
The estimated median size and number of undiscovered oil fields are 12 MMBO and 30 fields; the same values for undiscovered gas fields are 60 BCFG and 15 fields.
The ranges of number, size, and coproduct-ratio estimates for undiscovered fields are given in table 3.
The estimated means of the undiscovered conventional petroleum volumes are 667 MMBO, 2,746 BCFG, and 64 MMBNGL (table 4).
The mean size of the largest anticipated undiscovered oil and gas fields is 110 MMBO and 283 BCFG, respectively.
