Among the 26 boutique provinces identified for the World Energy Assessment Project was an onshore, oil-prone area named the Kohat-Potwar geologic province (figure 1).
The province (part of the upper Indus Basin) is bounded on the north by the Parachinar-Murree fault, on the west by the Kurram fault, on the south by the Surghar and Salt Ranges, and on the east by the Jehlum fault (figs. 2 and 3).
The area includes the Potwar and Kohat Plateaus and Bannu Depression.
The Kohat-Potwar province consists of a portion of the Indian plate structurally deformed by plate collision and overthrust of the Himalayas on the north and northwest.
Important structural features (figure 3) include a series of faulted and unfaulted anticlines developed on multiple detachment surfaces as deep as Cambrian and thrust faults that trend generally southwest-northeast parallel to the plate-collision boundary.
The total petroleum system (TPS) and assessment unit (AU) discussed herein (figure 4) acquired their primary structural and stratigraphic features from events associated with plate movements that occurred from latest Paleozoic to the present.
From Permian through Middle Jurassic time, the Indian plate was located in the Southern Hemisphere—between the African, Antarctic, and Australian plates—and comprised part of southern Gondwana.
The Lower Permian Tobra Formation tillites (figure 5) in the Kohat-Potwar area and other basal Permian glacial deposits on the Indian plate are indicative of a much cooler paleoclimate (Shah and others, 1977).
The area that is now the Indus Basin, Kohat-Potwar geologic province, and northern India, was a shallow continental shelf on which carbonates, shales, and sandstones were deposited.
This carbonate-dominated environment persisted at least intermittently on the western part of the shelf through the Late Jurassic and is represented by the interbedded shales and thick limestones of the Springwar Formation and as much as 1,400 m of the Middle and Upper Jurassic Sulaiman Limestone Group on western and northern portions of the plate.
In the area that is now the Kohat-Potwar geologic province, shelf and shallow-marine stages are preserved in the rocks of the Permian Nilawahan, Permian and Triassic Zaluch, Triassic Musa Khel, and Jurassic and Cretaceous Surghar Groups.
During the Late Jurassic, Madagascar, India, Australia, Antarctica, and the Seychelles began to break away from Africa, forming the Somali Rift Basin (figs. 6 and 7).
Late Jurassic rifting also initiated separation of Australia and Antarctica from India.
During Early Cretaceous time, the Indian plate drifted northward, entering warmer latitudes.
Along the eastern portion of the Indian plate, the Rajmahal Trap volcanics were deposited.
On the northwest margin of the plate, marine shales and limestones of the Lower Cretaceous Sembar and Goru Formations were deposited over a regional erosional surface on the Sulaiman Groupage In the Kohat Potwar area, this erosional surface is present at the top of the Samana Suk Formation and is overlain by sandstones and shales of the Lower Cretaceous Chichali Formation.
On the eastern shelf of the Indian plate, the Bolpur and Ghatal Formations were deposited.
Whereas carbonates are recognized primarily on the eastern and western shelves today, it is likely that they were deposited over much of the northern shelf as well.
This shelf environment persisted through the Late Cretaceous when regressive sandstones such as the Lumshiwal and Pab Formations in the west and Tura Formation in the east were deposited.
Northward plate movement continued during the Late Cretaceous, and a transform fault became active along the Ninety-East Ridge (figure 9).
Rifting between Madagascar and the Seychelles portion of the Indian plate initiated formation of the Mascarene Basin.
Extensional faulting occurred as the western part of the Indian plate sheared southward relative to the main plate (Kemal and others, 1992).
Counterclockwise rotation of the Indian plate was initiated, and the Seychelles portion of the Indian plate began to break away (Waples and Hegarty, 1999) (figure 9).
Latest Cretaceous was also a time of intense volcanism in western India, with the expulsion of the Deccan Trap basalts and further rifting, which began, and then failed, leaving the Cambay and Kutch Grabens floored with the Deccan Trap basalts (Biswas and Deshpande, 1983).
The rifting event in the Cambay and Kutch areas might be related to the extensional faulting and shear zone that was developing at the same time in the Indus Basin.
From the Late Cretaceous through middle Paleocene, trap deposits and basal sands continued to accumulate on the western, northern, and eastern shelves of the Indian plate (figure 10).
Oblique convergence of the Indian plate with the microplates constituting the southern edge of the Eurasian plate resulted in wrench faulting and development of regional arches such as the Jacobad and Sargodha Highs in the Indus Basin (figure 2) (Kemal and others, 1992).
The Indian plate continued to move northward at an accelerated rate of 15–20 cm/yr (Scotese and others, 1988).
When the eastern edge of the plate passed over the Kerguelen hot spot, a chain of islands began to form near long 90°E.
Continued northward movement and counterclockwise rotation of the Indian plate slowly closed the Tethyan Sea along the northern and northwestern plate boundaries.
The Sulaiman-Kirthar fold belt (Province 8025, figure 1) began to develop as a result of this oblique collision and rotation.
Regional uplift and the resulting mountain ranges rising on the Eurasian plates to the north and west created a new sediment source, and the prevailing south to north sediment transport direction on the Indian plate was reversed.
From Eocene through middle Miocene, a carbonate platform buildup occurred intermittently on the shelves around much of the Indian plate.
A trench formed along the subduction zone as the Indian plate began to slip beneath the Eurasian plate (figure 11).
The Eurasian plate shed large volumes of sediments into the trench as subduction continued.
This terrestrial sediment influx from the rapidly rising Himalayan, Sulaiman-Kirthar, Sino-Burman, and Indo-Burman Ranges significantly exceeded carbonate buildup rates on late Miocene platforms (Roychoudhury and Deshpande, 1982) and smothered carbonate reef formation along the shelf areas.
The former shelf areas along the collision zones were either subducted or became emergent fluvial-deltaic environments.
In the Kohat-Potwar geologic province shallow northeast-trending anticlines and overturned folds developed above multiple detachment surfaces (figure 12).
Detachment surfaces as deep as the Eocambrian (late Precambrian) salts developed as a result of continued plate convergence, and associated crustal shortening of as much as 55 km occurred (Jaswal and others 1997; Kemal and others, 1992).
The proto-Indus, Narmada, Ganges, Brahmaputra, Megna, Chindwin, and Irrawaddy Rivers developed extensive deltas as the Himalayas and other ranges continued to shed sediments at a high rate.
Today, uplift of the Himalayas and subduction of the Indian plate continues, and the growth rate of the Indus, Ganges-Brahmaputra (Megna), and Irrawaddy deltas remains high.
In the Kohat-Potwar area, crustal shortening also continues.
