The approximately 235-mi-long cross section E–E’, normal to depositional strike, from central Ohio, through southwestern Pennsylvania, to northern West Virginia, shows the stratigraphic framework, nomenclature, and depositional sequences of the Niagaran Provincial Series (Lower and lower Upper Silurian).
Lower Silurian hydrocarbon reservoirs in Ohio include, in ascending order, the following stratigraphic units: Medina sandstone, Cabot Head Shale (lower), “Clinton” sandstone, and Cabot Head Shale (upper).
In central Ohio, the Brassfield Limestone replaces the Medina sandstone and part of the Cabot Head Shale (lower).
The combined Medina sandstone, Cabot Head Shale, and “Clinton” sandstone interval thickens abruptly eastward across a hinge zone in southwestern Pennsylvania and grades into a sandstone-dominated unit named the Tuscarora Formation (Sandstone).
The upper part of the Tuscarora in Pennsylvania is characterized by an interval having increased amounts of shale and siltstone called the Castanea Member.
In West Virginia, the Castanea Member is replaced by the lower part of the Cacapon Sandstone Member.
Regionally extensive carbonate and shale units overlie the “Clinton” sandstone, Medina Group, and Tuscarora Sandstone (Formation) along most of the cross section.
In ascending order, the carbonate units consist of an unnamed limestone (dolomite), Reynales Limestone (Dolomite), Dayton Limestone (Dolomite), and Irondequoit Limestone (Dolomite).
In Ohio, the 30- to 70-ft-thick Rochester Shale overlies the Irondequoit Limestone.
The carbonate and shale interval is about three times thicker in Pennsylvania and West Virginia than it is in Ohio.
In Pennsylvania and West Virginia this interval is named the Rose Hill Formation and it overlies the Tuscarora.
The carbonate units either pinch out into shale in the Rose Hill Formation or are replaced by sandstone beds, commonly hematite bearing, that constitute the upper part of the Cacapon Sandstone Member of the Rose Hill Formation.
The thickest part of the combined “Clinton” sandstone, Medina sandstone, and Cabot Head Shale (lower and upper) interval is located in eastern Ohio where thicknesses range from about 200 to 210 ft.
In central Ohio this interval thins to about 120 ft partly because its lower part is replaced by the Brassfield Limestone.
The equivalent Tuscarora Sandstone (Formation) ranges in thickness from 325 to 475 ft in southwestern Pennsylvania and northern West Virginia.
Two sequences (1 and 3) and three systems tracts are identified in the “Clinton” sandstone-Medina sandstone, Medina Group, and Tuscarora Sandstone (Formation) along section E–E’.
The lower sequence, defined as sequence 1, consists of (a) a lower transgressive systems tract with a shoreface sandstone, a braided fluvial component, and an overlying offshore marine shale and (b) an overlying highstand systems tract with westward-prograding shoreface sandstone and interbedded offshore marine shale.
Sequence 3 consists of (a) a transgressive systems tract with fluvial and estuarine sandstone deposits overlain by tidal-flat deposits and (b) an undefined systems tract.
Intervening sequence 2 of Hettinger (2001) is not recognized in this study.
The transgressive systems tract in sequence 1 rests unconformably on Queenston Shale and Juniata Formation red beds of probable Late Ordovician age.
Dennison and Head (1975) named this unconformity the Cherokee unconformity and suggested that it was caused by a fall in eustatic sea level.
The top of the transgressive systems tract is defined by a maximum flooding surface near the base of the Cabot Head Shale (lower) and at the top of the basal sandstone unit of the Tuscarora Sandstone (Formation).
The highstand systems tract in sequence 1 consists of shoreface sandstones of the “Clinton” sandstone that become younger and overlap one another in a westward direction and pinch out into offshore marine shale of the Cabot Head Shale (lower).
The base of the transgressive systems tract in sequence 3 is marked primarily by a regional unconformity that resulted from erosion into the underlying highstand systems tract.
The resultant paleovalleys have been backfilled by tidally influenced deposits (Hettinger, 2001).
This previously unrecognized unconformity was probably caused by a fall in eustatic sea level at the Rhuddanian-Aeronian boundary as interpreted by Ross and Ross (1996).
Moreover, this unconformity may correlate with the “Tuscarora unconformity” recognized in southwestern Virginia and adjoining West Virginia by Bambach (1987) and Dorsch and others (1994).
Paleovalley incision and accompanying fluvial and estuarine deposits are not recognized in central Ohio.
Here, the base of the upper transgressive systems tract is defined by a ravinement surface, a surface of minor subaerial exposure and shoreline erosion, that follows the top of shoreface deposits of the underlying highstand systems tract.
Beginning in eastern Ohio, the ravinement surface cuts progressively across the top of fluvial and estuarine deposits and overlying tidal-flat deposits of the “Clinton” sandstone and continues eastward across the top of the Castanea Member of the Tuscarora Sandstone (Formation).
A maximum flooding surface, identified in the shale unit overlying the unnamed limestone, tentatively marks the top of the upper transgressive systems tract.
Of the stratigraphic units shown on E–E’, the “Clinton” sandstone is the major oil and gas producing interval.
The drilling depth to oil and natural gas production in the “Clinton” sandstone varies from about 2,443 ft in central Ohio to about 6,606 ft in eastern Ohio.
Small amounts of gas are produced from the Tuscarora Sandstone (Formation) at about 11,580 ft in southwestern Pennsylvania and at about 7,208 ft in northern West Virginia.
Initial production flow (IPF) of petroleum recorded for each well along section E–E’ provides an estimate of the variability in reservoir performance across the Lower Silurian regional oil and gas accumulation.
Gas IPFs from wells in the “Clinton” sandstone have a median value of 65 MCFG per day and range from 10 MCFG per day to 1,500 MCFG per day.
There is no obvious correlation between IPF and depositional facies, systems tracts, and basin-center–hybrid-conventional parts of the regional accumulation.
Oil IPFs are highest in the East Canton and Wooster oil fields where they are as high as 75 BO and 240 BO per day, respectively.
The East Canton oil field is an anomaly because it is located in the gas-dominated basin-center part of the regional accumulation.
Gas IPFs ranging from 313 to 16,300 MCFG per day were reported from the Tuscarora Formation (Sandstone).
Very likely, the greatest of these IPF values is influenced by open fracture systems.
