The Mowry Composite Total Petroleum System (TPS) encompasses the entire Southwestern Wyoming Province, which includes most of southwestern Wyoming and parts of northwestern Colorado and northeastern Utah.
The TPS is a composite system because it contains petroleum generated from multiple source rocks including marine shale units of the Mowry and Thermopolis Shales and their equivalents and possibly contributions from marine shale of the Allen Hollow Shale Member of the Frontier Formation, and from coaly and lacustrine facies in continental units of the Bear River, Frontier, and Dakota Formations.
Petroleum was generated during at least two separate tectonic events leading to (1) generation and migration of oil and gas at about 80-100 million years ago eastward out of a foredeep basin now preserved in the Idaho-Wyoming-Utah thrust belt, which forms the western border of the province; and (2) Cretaceous through presentday generation (80 million years ago to present) of petroleum from source rocks buried during Laramide basin development within the province.
Oil and gas migrated into fluvial, tidal, deltaic, and shoreface sandstone reservoirs of the Bear River and Frontier, Cloverly, Dakota Sandstone Formations, and Muddy Sandstone Member of the Thermopolis Shale.
The hydrocarbons were trapped in structural, stratigraphic, and basin-centered accumulations.
Seals include thick, continuous marine shale and in some cases terrestrial to estuarine mudstone units, diagenetic seals, and capillary pressure seals.
A conventional oil and gas assessment unit and a continuous gas assessment unit (AU) were de.ned for the Mowry Composite TPS.
The Mowry Conventional Oil and Gas AU covers the entire province and includes mainly intrabasinal and basin margin structures and stratigraphic traps and also includes traps located stratigraphically below the basin-centered accumulation of the Mowry Continuous Gas AU.
The continuous gas AU underlies an area of about 11.5 million acres where the approximate limit of gas saturation is de.ned by (1) areas of overpressure, (2) bottom hole temperature greater than 200 degrees, (3) vitrinite re.ectance greater than 0.8 percent, (4) low-permeability sandstones, and (5) no reported gas/water contacts in the reservoirs.
Mean resource estimates for the Mowry Conventional Oil and Gas AU totaled 6.6 million barrels of oil (MMBO), 0.2 trillion cubic feet of gas (TCFG), and 5.5 million barrels of natural gas liquids (MMBNGL).
Mean resource estimates for the Mowry Continuous Gas AU are 8.5 TCFG and 171 MMBNGL.
Total undiscovered gas resources for the continuous and conventional AUs having potential for production over the next 30 years are estimated at a mean of about 8.8 TCFG with a range from 6.8 to 10.9 TCFG.
The purpose of this study is to assess the potential for undiscovered oil and gas resources in the Mowry Composite Total Petroleum System (TPS) in the Southwestern Wyoming Province.
The TPS approach to resource assessment requires de.ning an area of active source rock and all known and undiscovered reservoirs and also requires an understanding of petroleum generation, trap formation, and seals, which are factors needed for oil and gas accumulations to exist (Magoon and Dow, 1994).
The Mowry is a composite system because there are multiple source rocks present within about a 1,000-ft stratigraphic interval, and the relative contribution of petroleum from individual sources cannot be distinguished on the basis of data presently available.
The name Mowry is applied to the TPS because it is by far the most important contributor to the petroleum system (Burtner and Warner, 1984).
Two AUs were de.ned during this study, one conventional and one continuous.
The petroleum system approach used in this assessment is somewhat different from a play approach used for conventional accumulations in previous assessments (Law and others, 1989; Law, 1996), although the methodology is similar in both studies.
Conventional accumulations of the Mowry TPS units were previously included in seven different plays (Law, 1996, Plays 3701-3707).
These seven plays contained hydrocarbons from multiple source rocks, whereas the current approach combines all accumulations from Mowry composite source rocks together into one AU.
The Mowry TPS continuous assessment unit can be compared very closely with the Cloverly-Frontier Play of the last assessment (Law 1996, Play 3740).
In addition to the TPS approach, our current methodology employs a "sweet spot"ù analysis to re.ne the in-place volumetric calculations and play-scale technologically recoverable calculations used in previous assessments (Law and others, 1989; Law, 1996).
The Southwestern Wyoming Province is an area bounded by major thrust faults or related structures and includes the Green River, Great Divide, Hoback, Sand Wash, and Washakie Basins (figure 1).
The province also contains the Rock Springs uplift and four major intrabasinal anticlines:  the Cherokee ridge, Moxa arch, Pinedale anticline, and Wamsutter arch (figure 1).
Sediments of the Mowry Composite TPS were deposited on the western edge of the Cretaceous Western Interior seaway in a foreland basin during Albian through Turonian time with a fold and thrust belt to the west active between Jurassic and latest Paleocene time (Jordan, 1981; Wiltschko and Dorr, 1983).
Marine and terrestrial source rocks were buried within the foredeep and overridden by the eastward-breaking thrusts between approximately 100 and 80 million years ago (Ma) (Burtner and others, 1994) at which time petroleum was generated.
Oil and gas migrated through carrier beds, such as the Oyster Ridge Sandstone Member of the Frontier Formation, and were trapped in stratigraphic pinch-outs or contemporaneous intrabasinal structures, such as the Moxa arch.
By the Late Cretaceous and continuing into the Eocene, compressional tectonics created major basin-bounding structures of the Uinta and Wind River Mountains and lesser magnitude structures such as the Sparks Ranch thrust and Rawlins uplift (figure 1).
Subbasins and arches were created concurrently with these uplifts, which subdivide the province today.
These basins were filled during Eocene to Miocene time with a thick succession of volcaniclastic sediments to at least an elevation surface about 4,000 ft above presentday topography (Mears, 1993).
Erosion and dissection of the basins to presentday topography took place from the late Miocene to present (Mears, 1993).
