Fracture systems include joints, cleats, and fault-related shear fractures (figures 9, 10, 11).
Vertical joints are widespread in shale and sandstone and are typically spaced between 0.5 and 10 m apart.
Closely spaced joints (about 0.5 to 2.5 cm) in coals are called cleats and are a primary control on aquifer and reservoir quality in the Pottsville coal interval.
Joint systems tend to be strata-bound (Pashin and others, 2003); that is, the upper and lower tips of the fractures tend to be at or near the upper and lower contacts of the host shale, sandstone, or coal (figures 9, 10, 11).
Pashin and others (2003) observed that fracture spacing in shale and sandstone increases logarithmically with bed thickness, and McFall and others (1986) and Pashin and others (1999a) observed that cleat spacing decreases markedly as coal rank increases.
Therefore, fracture height in the Pottsville Formation generally equals bed thickness, and fracturing of adjacent beds took place with a high degree of mechanical and thermal independence.
Joint systems constitute orthogonal sets of vertical fractures composed of systematic joints and cross joints (figures 9, 10, 11) (Ward and others, 1984; Pashin and others, 1999a, 2004).
Systematic joints are planar fractures that can have surface-trace lengths on the order of 100 m.
Cross joints are shorter than systematic joints, tend to strike perpendicular to systematic joints, and commonly terminate at intersections with systematic joints.
In coal, systematic joints are referred to as face cleats, and cross joints are called butt cleats (figure 11).
Systematic joints and cleats have distinctive orientations in the eastern Black Warrior Basin (Ward and others, 1984)  (figure 12).
Joints in sandstone and shale can be subdivided into a regional joint system and a localized cross-joint system that is restricted to the area containing Appalachian folds on the east basin margin (figure 12A).
Systematic joints of the regional joint system strike with a vector mean azimuth of North 47° E., whereas systematic joints of the fold-related system strike with a vector mean azimuth of North 64° W. Similarly, cleat systems can be subdivided into a regional cleat system and a localized system that is restricted to the southeast basin margin (figure 12B) (Pashin and others, 2004).
Face cleats of the regional cleat system strike with a vector mean azimuth of North 62° E., which is 15° east of the regional systematic joint system.
Face cleats in the localized fracture system along the southeast margin of the basin strike with a vector mean azimuth of North 36° W.
Joints and cleats in the Pottsville Formation are commonly mineralized (Pashin and others, 1999b; Pitman and others, 2003), with calcite the dominant fracture-filling mineral in shale and sandstone, and pyrite and calcite more common in coal.
Fracture-filling minerals generally have a patchy distribution and seldom fill fractures completely, so these minerals are generally considered not to be major obstacles to fluid flow and, in places, may even help prop fractures open that would otherwise be closed (Pashin and others, 2004).
Dipping fractures and fractures with slickensides are abundant within 10 m of normal faults and form crisscrossing networks that have been subdivided into synthetic and antithetic shear fractures by Pashin and others (1991) (figure 9).
Synthetic shears dip parallel to the associated fault, whereas antithetic shears dip opposite to the associated fault.
Faults and the associated shear fractures cut across bedding and thus are possible avenues for hydrologic communication between the surface and the reservoir coals.
In a study of gas seeps in the Black Warrior Basin, Clayton and others (1994) investigated a number of exposed normal faults and reported a significant gas seep along one fault in Oak Grove field.
However, Pitman and others (2003) observed pervasive cementation of coal cleats within 10 m of normal faults in the Black Warrior Basin.
This cementation appears to inhibit flow in coal along large segments of many faults (Pashin and others, 2004).
The potential for sedimentary rocks to generate hydrocarbons, and the nature of the hydrocarbons generated, depend on the amount, composition, and thermal maturity of organic matter in the rock (Tissot and Welte, 1984).
Total organic carbon (TOC) content is measured in terms of weight percent (wt %).
The relative hydrogen richness of the organic matter, and an indication of the types of hydrocarbons that will be generated, are measured by hydrogen index (HI, Rock-Eval®, S2/TOC, mg/g).
Relative thermal maturity of organic matter is measured by Tmax (Rock-Eval®, °C), vitrinite reflectance (Ro), and calculations from proximate analyses and calorific value determinations (BTU/lb) of coal (for example, see American Society for Testing and Materials D–388, 2001).
Source rocks for the gas accumulations in the Pottsville Coal TPS and the Black Warrior Basin AU are the Pottsville Formation coals and coaly shales, which also form the principal reservoirs (figure 2).
Ranges for TOC and HI for 39 coal and shale samples from the Pottsville Formation are summarized in table 1.
The distribution of HI and organic facies (designated A–D, see below) for the samples is shown in figure 13.
Jones (1987) defined a series of organic facies (A–D) for rocks worldwide on the basis of microscopic and chemical characteristics (HI, H/C ratios) of organic matter that is marginally mature with respect to petroleum generation (Ro  about 0.50).
The volume and type of generated hydrocarbons vary widely with organic facies.
Organic facies A, AB, and B are sources primarily of oil.
Organic facies BC has capacity to generate both oil and gas.
Hydrocarbons generated from organic facies C are nearly always condensate and gas.
Organic facies CD has a moderate capacity for dry gas generation, whereas organic facies D is essentially nongenerative (Jones, 1987).
As shown in figure 13, organic-matter compositions in the Pottsville Formation primarily represent organic facies CD (median HI = 130, with the range in compositions from organic facies C to D).
Where thermally mature, the organic matter in facies CD should primarily generate dry gas.
Thermal maturation (rank) of bituminous coals can be determined through calculations made from proximate analyses of coal (moisture, ash, volatile-matter, and fixed-carbon contents), sulfur contents, and calorific values (Btu/lb), and (or) Ro measurements.
Thermal maturation parameters have been mapped for each Pottsville coal zone by Winston (1990a, b), and the most recent thermal maturity mapping has relied on interpretation of proximate analyses and Ro measurements (Telle and others, 1987; Winston, 1990a, b; Levine and Telle, 1991; Pashin and others, 1999a).
Rank of the Pottsville Formation coals ranges from high-volatile C bituminous to low-volatile bituminous (Semmes, 1929; Winston, 1990a, b).
For the Mary Lee coal zone (figure 14), the coals are of high-volatile C bituminous coal rank in northern Walker County, western Fayette County, northeastern Pickens County, and eastern Lamar County, Alabama.
Coals of medium-volatile and low-volatile bituminous rank are centered in an elliptical “bullseye” area in eastern Tuscaloosa County and western Jefferson County, Alabama, near the southeast margin of the Black Warrior Basin (figure 14) (Winston, 1990a; Pashin and Hinkle, 1997).
The southeast side of this elliptical area is marked by the upturned northwest limb of the Blue Creek anticline.
The coal rank pattern in west-central Alabama does not reflect thickening of the Pottsville Formation coal interval into the Moundville–Cedar Cove depocenter (see figure 6).
Present burial depths of the upper part of the Pottsville Formation in coal-bed gas fields of the Black Warrior Basin range from 0 to about 4,600 ft.
During maximum burial in the Early Permian, the formation was buried to depths of 6,500 to 10,000 ft (Telle and others, 1987; Levine and Telle, 1991; Carroll and others, 1995).
Lopatin modeling in Pickens County, Alabama (figure 15) provides evidence for a complex burial and thermal history, enabling some generalizations about burial and hydrocarbon generation (Telle and others, 1987; Hines, 1988; Carroll and others, 1995).
Major thermal maturation apparently took place during rapid burial associated with Appalachian-Ouachita orogenesis, and coal in the Pottsville Formation attained a rank of high-volatile A bituminous coal near maximum burial, which occurred near the end of the Paleozoic (about 265 Ma).
Importantly, major thermogenic gas generation is thought to begin as coal reaches that rank (Jüntgen and Karweil, 1966).
In the Pottsville Formation, virtually all coal-gas production is from coal of high-volatile A bituminous or higher rank (Ro ≥ 0.8) (Pashin and others, 2004).
According to the Lopatin models, minor thermogenic gas generation may have continued during postorogenic unroofing but was effectively completed by the Late Cretaceous, when the Gulf Coastal Plain and Mississippi Embayment formed.
Although burial associated with foreland basin subsidence may have been an important mechanism influencing thermal maturation, rank anomalies in the Pottsville Formation are not directly related to the regional isopach and structural contour patterns (figures 6, 7), indicating that burial maturation was overprinted strongly by spatial and temporal changes in the paleogeothermal gradient (Telle and others, 1987; Winston, 1990a, b; Levine and Telle, 1991).
Accordingly, the paleogeothermal gradient is thought to have been lowest in the area containing less thermally mature coal of high-volatile C and B bituminous rank and highest in the area containing medium-volatile and low-volatile bituminous coal.
The origin of the elevated geothermal gradient is unclear; the best hypothesis advanced to date is tectonic expulsion of hot fluids from the Appalachian orogen (Winston, 1990a, b; Goldhaber and others, 2003; Pashin and others, 2004).
