The Mesaverde Formation consists of a basal regressive marginal marine sandstone overlain by interbedded non-marine sandstone, siltstone, shale, carbonaceous shale, and coal deposited in coastal plain and marginal marine environments as the western shoreline of the Cretaceous sea retreated eastward across the Bighorn Basin (Severn, 1961; Mackenzie, 1975; Klug, 1993; Johnson and others, 1998).
The formation is Campanian in age and can be subdivided into a lower member, a middle or main part, and the Teapot Sandstone Member (figure 6) (Keefer and others, 1998; Johnson and others, 1998).
The lower member of the Mesaverde Formation, referred to as the Eagle Sandstone in Montana by Johnson and Finn (2004) and as the Eagle Formation of the Mesaverde Group by Severn (1961) and Mackenzie (1975), is an eastward-thinning wedge of marginal marine and nonmarine strata (figures 6, 7).
It conformably overlies and interfingers with the upper sandy part of the Cody Shale and is separated from the middle member or main body of the Mesaverde by the Claggett Member of the Cody Shale (figures 6, 7).
The lower member is present in the central and eastern parts of the basin, where it consists of very fine to medium-grained sandstone, siltstone, shale, carbonaceous shale, and coal deposited as an eastward- prograding deltaic complex (Mackenzie, 1975; Johnson and others, 1998).
The basal beds are very fine to fine-grained sandstone that were deposited in a marginal marine setting and have been referred to as the Virgelle Sandstone Member in Montana by Johnson and Finn (2004) or as the Virgelle sandstones by Severn (1961).
The basal sandstones grade upwards into interbedded shale, carbonaceous shale, coal, and sandstone that were deposited in a delta plain setting (Mackenzie, 1975).
The lower member is thickest at its western limit where it is generally around 400-500 ft thick but locally exceeds 800 ft (figure 13) (see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM).
It merges with the main part of the Mesaverde Formation to the west, and thins to zero to the east where is grades into the upper part of the Cody Shale (figure 6).
West of the Claggett pinchout, the lower and middle Mesaverde members merge as one unit simply referred to as Mesaverde Formation.
Where the Claggett Shale is present, that part of the Mesaverde Formation overlying it is referred to as the main body of the formation by Keefer and others (1998) and as the middle part by Johnson and others (1998).
According to Johnson and Finn (2004), it is, in part, equivalent to the Parkman Sandstone and the lower part of the Judith River Formation in Montana (figures 6, 7).
Severn (1961) referred to this interval, together with the overlying Teapot Sandstone Member as the Judith River Formation, and Mackenzie (1975) referred to it as the Judith River Formation of the Mesaverde Groupage It consists of interbedded sandstone, siltstone, shale, carbonaceous shale, and coal deposited in marginal marine, coastal plain, and fluvial environments (Severn, 1961; Mackenzie, 1975; Johnson and others, 1998).
The basal strata of the middle part are very fine to fine-grained and have been interpreted as progradational units that accumulated as shoreface sandstones as the western shoreline of the seaway retreated eastward across the basin (Keefer and others, 1998; Johnson and others, 1998).
The sandstones in the nonmarine part of the Mesaverde are very fine to medium-grained, lenticular, and originated as stream channel and crevasse splay deposits (Johnson and others, 1998).
The Mesaverde generally thins from west to east where a combined thickness of the main part of the Mesaverde and Teapot Sandstone Member, excluding the lower member or Eagle Sandstone, ranges from greater than 1,200 ft in the southwestern part of the basin to less than 500 ft along the eastern margin of the basin (figure 14).
The Teapot Sandstone Member, the uppermost member of the Mesaverde Formation, consists of light-gray to white, fine- to coarse-grained sandstone and minor amounts of gray mudstone (Johnson and others, 1998).
Based on outcrop studies by Mackenzie (1975) and Johnson and others (1998), it is considered to be fluvial in origin throughout most of the basin; however, in the eastern part, Johnson and others (1998) described hummocky cross-bedding in the lower part of the unit, indicating that it is partly marginal marine in origin.
The thickness of the Teapot Member is highly variable and ranges from a few tens of feet to more than 300 ft (Keefer and others, 1998; Johnson and others, 1998).
The Meeteetse Formation and Lewis and Bearpaw Shales are intertonguing marine, marginal marine, and nonmarine strata of latest Campanian and early Maastrichtian age (Gill and Cobban, 1966; Merewether, 1996) (figures 6, 7).
Johnson and Finn (2004) considered the Meeteetse/Lewis/Bearpaw interval in the Bighorn Basin to be equivalent to the upper part of the Judith River Formation and overlying Bearpaw Shale in Montana (figures 6, 7).
The marine strata in this interval are included in the Lewis and Bearpaw Shales, and the marginal marine and nonmarine strata in the Meeteetse Formation.
The maximum combined thickness for the formations ranges from more than 1,100 ft in the northern and southwestern parts of the basin to about 500 ft in the southeastern part (figure 15).
The Meeteetse Formation is comprised of alternating thin beds of very fine to medium-grained sandstone, siltstone, shale, carbonaceous shale, and coal that accumulated in poorly drained coastal environments along the western shore of the Cretaceous seaway (Keefer and others, 1998).
The Lewis Shale is a westward-thinning tongue of marine shale and sandy shale interbedded with thin sandstone beds.
It is present in the eastern part of the basin, ranges in thickness from more than 300 ft on the east side of the basin, and thins westward to zero where it grades into the Meeteetse Formation (Keefer and others, 1998).
In the northern part of the basin, the Bearpaw Shale overlies, and in part intertongues with, the Meeteetse Formation and represents the last stages of marine sedimentation in the Bighorn Basin (figure 6).
Where present, the Bearpaw is about 80 to 200 ft thick (see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD- ROM); according to Johnson and others (1998), it consists of fissile gray shale and thin beds of very fine grained sandstone.
The Lance Formation, referred to as the Hell Creek Formation in Montana by Johnson and Finn (2004), consists of interbedded sandstone, shale, and minor conglomerate and represents the uppermost Cretaceous rocks in the Bighorn Basin.
Minor amounts of coal are present locally, but Johnson (1998) concluded that it was of minor importance.
Sandstone is the predominant lithology throughout much of the basin, particularly in the lower part of the formation, whereas the upper part is largely interbedded sandstone and shale (Keefer and others, 1998; Johnson and others, 1998).
The sandstones are fine- to coarse-grained, locally conglomeratic, and were deposited in fluvial systems (Johnson and others, 1998).
In the northern part of the basin, a sandstone interval in the basal part of the Lance overlying the Bearpaw Shale was interpreted as a shoreface deposit by Keefer and others (1998), and was believed to correlate with the Upper Cretaceous Fox Hills Sandstone.
Johnson and Finn (2004) referred to this marginal marine interval as the Lennep Sandstone in Montana (figures 6, 7).
The Lance is generally considered to be Maastrichtian in age; however, palynogical age determinations by Nichols (1998) indicated that locally it is in part earliest Paleocene in age.
The onset of the Laramide orogeny and initial partitioning of the Rocky Mountain foreland basin into smaller Laramide basins is indicated by the Lance thickness patterns in the Bighorn Basin, which range from less than 500 ft in the southeastern part of the basin to more than 1,500-1,800 ft near the basin axis (shown on figure 3) adjacent to and east of the Oregon Basin thrust fault (figures 3, 16) (Parker and Jones, 1986; see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM).
