Oil and gas production in the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province is from Cretaceous reservoirs, with minor production from Tertiary formations.
This is the Mesozoic-Cenozoic TPS 604101, with cumulative production of more than 2.88 BBO and 660 BCFG.
Estimated ultimate recoverable hydrocarbons for all fields is 6.89 BBOE.
Petroleum system 604101 is divided into the 60410101 (Hollin-Napo) and 60410102 (Basin-Center Gas) assessment units.
Basin production is from Cretaceous and Tertiary formations of the Hollin-Napo assessment unit.
Reservoirs are the Caballos, Villeta, and Pepino Formations of the Putumayo Basin, the Hollin and Napo Formations of the Oriente Basin, and the Cushabatay, Agua Caliente, Chonta, and Vivian Formations of the Maranon Basin.
Primary hydrocarbon source rocks for the Hollin-Napo assessment unit are marine and mixed marine-terrestrial shales of the Cretaceous Villeta “U”, Caballos, Napo, Hollin, Chonta, and Raya Formations.
Potential source rocks are the Triassic and Jurassic Pucara Group and possibly the Jurassic Sarayaquillo Group, but there is no known production of hydrocarbons that were generated from these strata.
The Basin-Center Gas assessment unit (60410102) has no production and is hypothetical; this assessment is based largely upon structural and depositional similarities of the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province to foreland basins of the Rocky Mountains in the U.S. that contain unconventional basin-center gas fields.
Potential reservoir intervals are marine sandstones of the Napo, Chonta, and Agua Caliente Formations in the western Oriente and Maranon Basins.
Probable hydrocarbon source rocks and seals are interbed­ded and bounding marine shales.
The Paleozoic TPS, 604102, has no production and is also hypothetical.
The assessment unit is the Permian Ene Formation (60410201), which is a hydrocarbon source and reservoir rock in the Ucayali Basin, south of the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province.
Oil from Cretaceous rocks of the Corrientes field and several other fields in the Maranon Basin may have been sourced from the Permian Ene Formation.
Graphs of weight percent sulfur versus API gravity of oils from fields across the province suggest that two or more source rocks may have generated oils, including a separate population for potential Ene Formation hydrocarbons.
Triassic salt that is concentrated in the western Maranon Basin may have formed structural traps during the time of movement and deformation.
Although Ene Formation source rocks are thermally mature for oil and possibly for gas generation, the limited drilling through 1996 to the Paleozoic formations has not encountered potential reservoirs.
