Drilling for oil and gas was not conducted in the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS (115001) prior to the middle 1970’s because of the shallow occurrence of Triassic rocks that were considered to be an economic basement.
In 1974, a well drilled on the Karazhanbas anticlinal uplift (figure 3) unexpectedly produced an oil flow from a depth of slightly more than 200 m.
Several more fields were discovered in similar structural traps during the next several years.
No discoveries have been made since the early 1980’s, although a number of prospects were drilled.
Seismic surveys indicate the presence of structures in the offshore part of this TPS, but no wells have been drilled there.
Only two oil fields of the TPS have been developed; one of them produces with steam injection.
Several oil fields and a single small gas field are known in the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS (figure 1).
All of the fields are on the Buzachi arch, but no hydrocarbon accumulations are known to be present in the South Buzachi depression.
Each field contains several pools in sandstone beds of Middle Jurassic and Neocomian age.
Aptian shales form a regional seal.
The shallowest reservoir is at a depth of only 238 m in the Karazhanbas field, and the deepest reservoir is at a depth of almost 1,300 m in the Arman field (figure 3).
Oils in all of the fields are partially biodegraded; they are heavy, sulfurous, and paraf.nic.
Oil density varies from 18.5° API at depths of 450–600 m in the Karazhanbas field to 29° API at a depth of 1,300 m in the Arman field.
The content of sulfur in some fields is as high as 2.4 percent.
Gas-oil ratios are low, and the composition of dissolved gas varies widely.
Some productive beds contain gas caps, and purely gas pools are present in upper pays of some fields (for example, in the Kalamkas field).
Several stratigraphic tests drilled to more than 5,000 m depth penetrated pre-Upper Permian rocks on the Buzachi Peninsula.
These rocks include Upper Devonian, Carboniferous, and Lower Permian marine carbonates and clastics.
Numerous diabase dikes are present in the Upper Carboniferous–Lower Permian shale section on top of the Buzachi arch.
Thicknesses of specific stratigraphic units vary widely in wells drilled on top of the arch and on its slopes (Kozmodemyansky and others, 1995), suggesting a complex structural history of the arch and possibly that it has an inverted tectonic origin.
The Upper Permian–Middle Triassic red and variegated clastic rocks are more than 3,000 m thick, and they unconformably overlie various older strata (Lipatova and others, 1985).
Upper Triassic dark-gray coaly shales 720 m thick are present only in the South Buzachi depression.
Lower Jurassic rocks are absent and Middle Jurassic continental, coaly, clastic rocks unconformably overlie the eroded surface of Triassic strata.
On top of the Buzachi arch, Middle Jurassic rocks are about 250 m thick; they thin on local uplifts and thicken to 500 m on the northern slope of the arch.
The Upper Jurassic is absent over most of the TPS area.
Neocomian rocks are primarily marine clastics, and they also include some carbonates in the Valanginian section and red beds in the Barremian section.
The Aptian Stage is represented by a shale bed 100–150 m thick.
Younger Cretaceous rocks crop out on the surface.
They are 150–450 m thick.
Source rocks have not been identified in the drilled sedimentary sequence of the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS.
Productive Jurassic rocks, although enriched in coaly organic material (the content of total organic carbon (TOC) is as high as 2.8 percent), were not buried to the oil generation window.
Some geologists proposed that oil accumulations in Jurassic and Cretaceous strata were formed by vertical migration of hydrocarbons from pre-Upper Permian marine rocks (Kozmodemyansky and others, 1995); however, geochemical data for these rocks are not available.
Slight gas shows were recorded in pre-Upper Permian rocks during drilling, but testing was unsuccessful.
Those rocks are separated from producing Jurassic strata by about 3,000 m of Upper Permian–Triassic red beds that are intensely compacted (especially the Upper Permian) and devoid of shows.
Vertical migration through the red beds is unlikely.
In addition, significant compaction of pre-Upper Permian rocks and the presence of numerous diabase dikes indicate that the rocks passed through the oil window long before Jurassic time.
A more probable scenario of formation of the oil and gas fields implies migration of hydrocarbons laterally from the North Caspian basin.
Source rocks for hydrocarbons in the North Caspian basin are in the deepwater basinal facies of the subsalt Paleozoic sequence.
From there, oil possibly migrated vertically into post-salt rocks and then updip through continuous Mesozoic strata onto the Buzachi arch.
The presence of oil and gas fields on the northern slope of the arch and their absence on the southern slope support this model.
If the model is correct, the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS is actually a part of the North Caspian Paleozoic TPS, although the Paleozoic stratigraphy and tectonic history of the area relate it to the North Ustyurt basin.
No inferences about the present state of maturity and time of maturation of source rocks can be made because the exact location of the source rocks is unknown.
However, the timing of trap formation, the very shallow occurrence of pools, and partial biodegradation of oil indicate that migration of hydrocarbons and the formation of fields were recent—probably not earlier than Miocene.
All oil pools of the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS are in Middle Jurassic (principally Bathonian) and Neocomian sandstones.
The fields contain a maximum of 12 pays (Kalamkas field), varying in thickness from a few to 40 m and separated by shale beds.
Reservoir properties of the sandstones at shallow depths are good.
Porosity ranges from 22 to 29 percent, and permeability ranges from tens to many hundreds of millidarcies.
The potential for the presence of reservoir rocks in the Triassic section is limited.
On most of drilled structures, Triassic rocks compose the leading edges of thrust plates (Popkov, 1991).
The rocks are significantly deformed and compacted; their porosity does not exceed 4 percent.
Somewhat better reservoir potential has been reported for Middle Triassic rocks on the northern slope of the Buzachi arch (Lipatova and others, 1985).
In some sandstone samples from the Kalamkas field, measured porosities were as high as 22 percent.
No potential reservoirs have been identified in older rocks.
All discovered fields of the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS are in structural traps.
The traps in Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks are elongated east-to-west anticlinal structures with steep northern flanks that commonly are cut by reverse faults.
The southern flanks of the anticlines are much more gentle.
Oblique normal faults also are present.
The anticlines are arranged in several linear zones that extend offshore (figure 3).
The Jurassic-Cretaceous anticlinal zones are underlain by the leading edges of thrust sheets composed of Triassic rocks.
The detachment surface probably is near the base of Upper Permian–Triassic clastics (Popkov, 1991).
The Jurassic-Cretaceous anticlines were formed by mild compression and rejuvenation of movements along pre-Jurassic thrust planes.
Three major compressional events took place in pre-Neocomian, pre-Tertiary, and pre-middle Miocene time.
Exploration for stratigraphic traps has not been conducted in the TPS.
Many stratigraphic traps are predicted to be present in pinch-out zones of Middle Jurassic rocks that unconformably onlap the Triassic sequence on the southern slope of the Buzachi arch.
Stratigraphic pinch-out traps around local Triassic uplifts were mapped in Jurassic rocks of the eastern Buzachi Peninsula (Rakhmetova and others, 1986).
On the northern slope of the arch, Middle Jurassic rocks possibly contain traps that are sealed by west-trending reverse faults on the northern limbs of anticlinal folds.
The Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS includes a single assessment unit (AU) - the Mesozoic Sandstone Reservoirs AU (11500101).
The principal petroleum potential of the AU is related to Jurassic and Neocomian rocks of the undrilled offshore extensions of anticlinal zones.
The offshore area is a direct continuation of the exploration play that presently contains all hydrocarbon reserves of the AU.
The model of hydrocarbon migration from the North Caspian basin, proposed here, suggests that the principal, and possibly entire, offshore potential is limited to the northern slope of the Buzachi arch and its crest.
However, developing and producing heavy oil offshore, using steam injection or other tertiary recovery techniques, may be uneconomic at present.
Onshore, some structural prospects have not been drilled (Kolomiyets and Polifosov, 1998); however, most of them are on the southern slope of the arch, where no discoveries have been made, probably because of the absence of hydrocarbon charge.
Some oil accumulations, primarily of small size, possibly are present in the AU in stratigraphic and fault-sealed traps.
The petroleum potential of the thick Upper Permian– Triassic red beds probably is low because of the poor quality of reservoir rocks and the absence of indigenous source rocks.
A model of long-distance lateral migration, similar to that proposed for Jurassic fields, is not applicable for Upper Permian– Triassic rocks in this region.
Pre-Upper Permian rocks of the AU occur at great depths, and their potential probably is low.
Undiscovered resources of the AU are shown in table 1.
Complete statistical data on assessment of this AU and other assessment units are included in U.S. Geological Survey World Energy Assessment Team (2000).
