The Pelagian Province generally coincides with the offshore shelf area of east-central Tunisia and northern Libya (figures 1, 2).
However, the western and southern boundaries are onshore.
The western boundary is along the North-South Axis (figure 1), a basement-related structural feature bounded by normal faults separating the Pelagian Province in eastern Tunisia from the Mesozoic fault basin farther west (Bobier and others, 1991).
The southern boundary was delineated along an escarpment that resulted from uplift of the Talemzane-Gefara and Nefusa Arches (figure 1).
The eastern boundary corresponds approximately with a fault zone and escarpment that marks the boundary between the Pelagian Shelf and Ionian Sea.
The northern boundary follows a rift zone between the African and European continental plates (figure 1).
Several major geologic structures exist within the Pelagian Province (figure 1).
Among the more pronounced structural highs are the Lampedusa Plateau, Medina Bank, Melita Bank, and Isis Horst.
The Ashtart-Tripolitania Basin (also called Gabes-Tarabulus Basin), Misurata Valley, Jarrafa Graben, and grabens associated with the rift zone to the north are major depressions.
These structures are oriented northwest to southeast.
Cross section A–A'(figure 5A) shows the major structural style as alternating horsts and grabens separated by normal faults.
The tectonic evolution of the Pelagian Province controlled source- and reservoir-rock deposition, source-rock maturation, and petroleum migration and accumulation (Bédir and others, 1992).
The Paleozoic record is not well known in the Pelagian Province, but based on better known Paleozoic sections of the Saharan Platform (partly shown in Fig. 5B) in southern Tunisia, the area was part of a passive continental margin, containing Cambrian to Carboniferous clastic rocks.
During the Carboniferous, Laurasia collided with Gondwana, marking the Hercynian event, resulting in the older Paleozoic section being folded, uplifted, and eroded (Aliev and others, 1971; Burollet and others, 1978; Boote and others, 1998).
In the Late Carboniferous and Permian, several rift basins and grabens formed along the northern margin of the African plate by extension as a result of the initial breakup of Gondwana and the opening of the Tethyan seaway (Guiraud, 1998).
Step faulting and subsidence occurred north of the Talemzane-Gefara Arch, where Upper Carboniferous and Permian sediments were deposited (figure 1) (Burollet and others, 1978; Guiraud, 1998).
Extension and subsidence continued into the Triassic and Early Jurassic (Morgan and others, 1998).
North-south-trending normal faults and east-west-trending transfer faults developed at this time, particularly along the North-South Axis in eastern Tunisia (Ouali, 1985; Morgan and others, 1998).
Clastic and carbonate sediments were deposited in the Triassic (Fig. 5B), as well as evaporites consisting of halite and sulfates (Burollet, 1991).
Flowage of the evaporites due to sedimentary loading resulted in vertical migration and formation of diapirs and subsurface “salt walls” (Burollet, 1991).
During the Early Jurassic, turbidites, as well as shelf and pelagic carbonates, were deposited.
In Middle and Late Jurassic time, the central Atlantic Ocean opened between Laurasia and Africa, developing a rift zone between the African and European continents.
Shelf carbonates were deposited in the Pelagian Province area at this time (Burollet and others, 1978; Morgan and others, 1998).
Faults associated with the opening of the Tethys Ocean and rifting between the European and African plates controlled sedimentation from the Middle Jurassic to the present (Morgan and others, 1998).
The depocenter that developed north of the Talemzane-Gefara Arch during the Permian shifted northward (Burollet and others, 1978).
During the Early Cretaceous, rifting continued along the northern margin of the African plate, resulting in subsidence of the Saharan Atlas and the Aures trough of northern Algeria and Tunisia (Vially and others, 1994; Guiraud, 1998).
Faults associated with rifting continued to control sedimentation (Morgan and others, 1998).
Clastic alluvial sediments from the Saharan Platform were deposited in the southern portion of the Pelagian Province whereas open-marine clastic and carbonate sediments were deposited in the northern portion (Burollet and others, 1978).
In some areas, sediment thickness was sufficient to initiate flowage of Triassic evaporites that continued into the Late Cretaceous (Morgan and others, 1998).
The late Paleozoic depocenter that developed north of the Talemzane-Gefara Arch migrated northward with the development of a trough in the area of the Gafsa-Gefara extensional fault system during the Aptian (figure 1) (Burollet and others, 1978).
Additionally, uplift and erosion occurred, particularly along the North-South Axis (Burollet and others, 1978), resulting in the Austrian Unconformity.
The African plate began to drift northward during the early Late Cretaceous, and this movement has continued to the present (Morgan and others, 1998).
Rifting occurred along the northern margin of the African plate as a result of dextral shearing between the African and European plates, developing a complex horst and graben system.
The grabens trend northwest to southeast and include the Ashtart-Tripolitania Basin and the Misurata Valley, and Jarrafa Graben (Fig. 1) (Jongsma and others, 1985; Hammuda and others, 1991; Guiraud, 1998).
Associated fault displacements and uplift of horst blocks controlled sedimentation (Morgan and others, 1998).
In the Santonian (Late Cretaceous), structural inversion, reverse or thrust faulting, and folding occurred (Guiraud, 1998; Morgan and others, 1998).
Fold belts along the Saharan Atlas, west of the North-South Axis, were initiated, whereby Triassic evaporites provided a décollement surface (Guiraud, 1998).
Gentle uplift occurred during the latest Cretaceous to Paleocene (Burollet, 1967a).
In the early Eocene, west-to-east or west-northwest-to-east-southeast transfer faults were reactivated (Morgan and others, 1998).
Sedimentation was controlled by this faulting activity, and facies boundaries of Ypresian (lower Eocene) rocks re.ect the orientation of these strike-slip faults (Bishop, 1988; Morgan and others, 1998).
The Kabylie microplate collided with the African margin in the Oligocene (Jongsma and others, 1985; Morgan and others, 1998), marked by an angular unconformity at the base of the Oligocene section (Morgan and others, 1998).
Additionally, a fractured mobile terrane developed along the north edge of the Pelagian area, leaving the southern portion (most of the Pelagian Province, Fig. 1) a passive platform attached to the African plate (Jongsma and others, 1985).
Tectonic activity in late Oligocene to Miocene time resulted in nondeposition or erosion over much of the area (Burollet, 1967a and b).
A disconformity between Miocene and older beds is present in eastern Tunisia, whereas an angular unconformity exists elsewhere (Burollet, 1967b).
In some areas, the entire Paleogene section was removed (figure 5C).
Deformation due to crustal shortening occurred north and west of the North-South Axis from late Miocene until early Pleistocene (Burollet, 1991; Morgan and others, 1998).
Uplift of areas east of the North-South Axis resulted in erosion (Bishop, 1975; Salaj, 1978).
The fault systems of the Pantelleria Graben, Malta Graben, Malta-Medina Channel, and Medina Graben (figure 1) began to develop in the late Miocene to early Pliocene; and deformation continues to the present, resulting from rifting and east-to-west dextral movements (Jongsma and others, 1985).
Fault systems, developed earlier in the Pelagian Province area (south of the Pantelleria Graben, Malta Graben, Malta-Medina Channel, and Medina Graben), continued to subside and control deposition.
Locally, relatively greater amounts of subsidence occurred, such as in the Gulf of Hammamet (Burollet and others, 1978).
Orogenic movement is presently occurring in northern Tunisia (Burollet and others, 1978).
Magmatic activity has occurred throughout the area (figure 1), much of it occurring in the Aptian to Paleocene due to rifting on the Pelagian Shelf and in the Neogene to Quaternary due to the Alpine (Atlassic) collision and subsequent opening of the western Mediterranean (Finetti, 1982; Wilson and Guiraud, 1998; Guiraud, 1998).
The presentday geothermal gradients are variable across the Pelagian Province, but observed trends correspond to the recent structural evolution of the area.
Values in offshore areas range from about 3.5° to 4.5°C/100 m (Lucazeau and Ben Dhia, 1989) and are higher than values in onshore areas.
The regional stratigraphy is variable across the Pelagian Province, and stratigraphic nomenclature varies among authors and countries.
Throughout the Mesozoic and Cenozoic, open-marine conditions existed generally in the northern part of the province, whereas neritic shelf conditions existed in the southern part (Burollet and others, 1978).
Little information exists for rocks older than Triassic or Jurassic (Burollet, 1990).
This study uses primarily the nomenclature given by Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières (1997) for the Tunisian portion of the province and Hammuda and others (1991) for the Libyan portion.
Columnar sections, stratigraphic nomenclature, and correlations are shown in figure 6.
Triassic rocks can be separated into two main intervals, a lower clastic interval and an upper evaporite interval (Bishop, 1975).
The lower clastic interval includes sandstone and mudstone of the Bir El Jaja, Ouled Chebbi, and Kirchaou or Trias Argilo-Greseux Inferieur Formations (figure 6).
Depositional facies were continental in the southern portion of the Pelagian Province, grading into shallow marine facies northward.
The northern limit of the clastic interval is not known (Bishop, 1975).
The Kirchaou or Trias Argilo-Greseux Inferieur Formation provides major oil and gas reservoirs in the Saharan Platform basins of Libya, Tunisia, and Algeria.
Between the clastic and evaporite intervals is a dolomitic section equivalent to the Azizia, Trias Carbonate, and Trias Argilo-Greseux Superieur (TAGS) Formations (figure 6).
The upper evaporite interval contains interbedded anhydrite, salt, and dolostone (Busson, 1967; Bishop, 1975).
The Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous sections contain mostly carbonate rocks, representing increasingly deeper marine to pelagic deposition northwestward (Burollet and others, 1978).
Lagoonal, deltaic, and terrigenous facies were present in the south and southwest, which migrated northward through time until the Aptian (Bishop, 1975; Burollet and others, 1978; M’Rabet, 1984).
These landward deposits include sandstone of the Upper Jurassic M’Rabtine Formation, Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous Meloussi Formation, and Lower Cretaceous Boudinar Formation (figure 6).
Marine deposits include limestone, dolostone, and marl (Salaj, 1978) of the Jurassic Nara Formation and Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous Sidi Khalif and M’Cherga Formations (figure 6).
Micrite and mudstone were deposited in the deep marine environments (Bishop, 1975).
Deposition of condensed sections, as well as the development of shoal facies and some reefs, occurred along the North-South Axis during the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous (Bishop, 1975; Salaj, 1978; Burollet and others, 1978).
Farther east and to the south, pelagic sediments were deposited in a subsiding depositional trough that existed in the presentday Gulf of Gabes area (figure 1) (Salaj, 1978; Burollet and others, 1978).
Barremian rocks consist of limestone, marl, and interbedded sandstone and shale of the Bouhedma and M’Cherga Formations, and the Sidi Aïch sandstone (Bishop, 1975; Salaj, 1978; Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, 1997).
Aptian and Albian rocks include limestone, dolostone, sandstone, mudstone, marl, and some evaporites of the Orbata, Serdj, Hameima, and Lower Fahdene Formations (Burollet and others, 1978; Salaj, 1978).
The Orbata Formation (or Orbata member of the Gafsa Formation in earlier publications) is limestone and dolostone (Bishop, 1975).
The Serdj Formation is a reef limestone that is laterally equivalent to the Orbata Formation and overlain by clastic sediments of either the deeper marine Hameima Formation or Lower Fahdene (also called the Mouelha) Formation (figure 6) (Burollet and others, 1978).
Unconformably overlying the Orbata Formation is the Albian to Turonian Zebbag Formation (figure 6).
Zebbag sediments were deposited on a shallow marine carbonate platform in the Gulf of Gabes area and central Tunisia (Bishop, 1988).
Sub-tidal conditions existed in central Tunisia and in the area of the presentday Gulf of Gabes coast, where lagoonal mudstone, dolostone, and anhydrite were deposited (Bishop, 1975; Bishop, 1988).
Reefs, reefoid facies, and rudist banks are also present (Bishop, 1975; Burollet and others, 1978).
In the Pelagian Province, the Zebbag Formation is limestone, dolostone, and bioclastic rocks, and is laterally equivalent to basinal mudstone and argillaceous limestone of the Fahdene and Bahloul Formations (Bishop, 1988).
The Fahdene Formation is a dark-gray mudstone and the Bahloul Formation is a dark-colored, laminated, euxinic, argillaceous limestone (Burollet and others, 1978; Bishop, 1988).
The Turonian to Campanian Aleg Formation overlies the Fahdene, Bahloul, and Zebbag Formations.
Rocks of the Aleg Formation include mudstone, limestone, and marl (Bishop, 1975; Salaj, 1978).
The Bireno, Miskar, and Douleb Formations are equivalent to some intervals of the Aleg Formation (figure 6).
Both the Bireno and Douleb Formations are, in part, laterally equivalent to, or are members of the Miskar Formation.
These formations consist of limestone, dolostone, and marl (Salaj, 1978; Entreprise Tunisienne d’Activités Pétrolières, c. 1999).
The Miskar Formation represents a rudist bank or banks on the shelf edge or slope (Bishop, 1988; Knott and others, 1995).
During the Campanian to Maastrichtian (latest Cretaceous), chalky limestone, micrite, and marl of the Abiod Formation were deposited over the Aleg Formation (Burollet and others, 1978; Salaj, 1978; Bishop, 1975).
The Santonian Jamil Formation and Campanian to Maastrichtian Bu Isa Formation are laterally equivalent, in part, to the Aleg and Abiod Formations (figure 6).
Overlying the Abiod and Bu Isa Formations is the Maastrichtian to Thanetian (Paleocene) El Haria Formation, a gray, black, or brown mudstone, containing some thin limestone beds in the lower part (Burollet, 1967b; Bishop, 1975).
The El Haria Formation covers much of the Pelagian Province but is absent in the southern and southwestern portions, as a result of either non-deposition or removal by erosion (Bishop, 1975).
The Al Jurf, Ehduz, and part of the Bilal Formations are laterally equivalent to the El Haria Formation (figure 6).
The Thanetian to Lutetian Metlaoui Group overlies the El Haria Formation and consists of rocks representing lagoonal, carbonate ramp, and marine deposition.
The lowermost beds are the Tselja (oldest) and Chouabine Formations (figure 6).
The Tselja Formation is represented by evaporites (including gypsum) and dolomitic rocks; the Chouabine Formation is represented by glauconitic and phosphatic beds (Burollet and others, 1978; Bishop, 1988).
Above and partially equivalent to the Chouabine Formation are rock units that represent a continuous set of lagoonal to open-marine depositional facies.
These units include the Faid Formation, representing an evaporitic anhydrite and dolostone facies; the Ain Merhotta Formation, restricted shelf gastropod facies (not shown in figure 6); the El Garia Formation, shallow-shelf nummulitid facies; and the Bou Dabbous Formation, deepwater globigerinid facies (Bishop, 1988; Loucks and others, 1998).
The Libyan Jirani Dolomite and Jdeir Formation are laterally equivalent to the Metlaoui Group (figure 6).
Rocks of the middle to upper Eocene are mudstone and limestone of the Souar Formation, and are laterally equivalent to evaporites of the Jebs Formation (Bishop, 1988).
Some coquinoid nummulitic carbonate rocks are present in the Souar Formation, such as the Lutetian Reineche Formation (figure 6) (Bishop, 1975).
The Oligocene Unconformity marks the top of the Souar and laterally equivalent formations.
Rocks representing a succession of terrigenous to marine depositional facies overlie the Nummulites vascus horizon (Bishop, 1975; Burollet and others, 1978; Salaj, 1978).
Each depositional facies type carries a different formation name.
The most landward formation is the Fortuna Formation, capped by continental rocks of the Messiouta Formation.
Nearshore marine rocks are represented by limestone of the Ketatna Formation, which inter.ngers with offshore mudstone of the Salammbo Formation (Schwab, 1995).
The Libyan equivalents to the Ketatna and Salammbo Formations are the Dirbal and Ras Abdjalil Formations (Hammuda and others, 1991) (figure 6).
The ages of all these formations range from Rupelian to Burdigalian (Oligocene to Miocene; Fig. 6).
Tectonic activity during the late Oligocene and early Miocene resulted in erosion and nondeposition.
Basal Miocene sediments are commonly conglomeritic and unconformably overlie older sediments (Burollet, 1967b).
Upper Miocene rocks include (1) the transgressive limestone of the Aïn Grab Formation; (2) marls of the Mahmoud Formation; (3) a sandy sequence represented by the Beglia, Saouaf, Birsa, Oum Douil, and part of the Segui Formations; and (4) lagoonal and brackish-water sediments (including anhydrite; Jongsma and others, 1985) of the Messinian Oued Bel Khedim and Marsa Zouaghah Formations (Burollet and others, 1978; Salaj, 1978) (figure 6).
The top of the Miocene is marked by an angular unconformity, above which lower Pliocene sediments were deposited during marine transgression (Bishop, 1975; Burollet and others, 1978).
During the Pliocene, strong local subsidence occurred in troughs and basins, into which thick accumulations of terrigenous and marine clastic sediments were deposited (Bishop, 1975; Burollet and others, 1978).
Formations include the Raf Raf and Porto Farina Formations, both laterally equivalent to parts of the Segui and Sbabil Formations (figure 6).
Quaternary deposits include clastic terrigenous and marine sediments (Burollet and others, 1978).
As of 1996, more discoveries were made in reservoirs of the Bou Dabbous–Tertiary Total Petroleum System than in reservoirs of the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite (figures 2 and 3).
Most of the larger oil and gas .elds in both total petroleum systems were discovered since 1970 (Appendices 1 and 2), although a few earlier discoveries had been made in the Jurassic-Cretaceous Composite Total Petroleum System.
Most of the exploration in Tunisia was in the Pelagian Province, beginning in the early 1950’s.
Fewer than 10 new-field wildcat wells were drilled in most years until the early 1970’s.
Since the early 1970’s, however, the number of new-field wildcat wells drilled per year increased, and the number peaked in the early 1980’s to more than 20 new-field wildcat wells per year; drilling then generally decreased until the middle 1990’s.
Exploration by foreign companies in Tunisia between the early 1960’s and the 1970’s was limited.
Throughout the 1970’s and 1980’s, however, Tunisia revised its legislation and introduced measures to encourage foreign companies to explore and develop oil and gas resources (Davies and Bel Haiza, 1990; Montgomery, 1994).
In the Libyan portion of the Pelagian Province, exploration activity appeared greatest in the early 1960’s with about six to seven new-.eld wildcat wells per year and again from the late 1970’s to early 1980’s with as many as six new-field wildcat wells per year.
Few new-field wildcat wells were drilled from the mid 1980’s to 1996.
In 1955, the Libyan government implemented the Libyan Petroleum Law, designed to attract foreign interest (Nelson, 1979).
In the early 1970’s, however, the Petroleum Law was amended as a result of nationalization of oil companies, thereby reducing the control of oil- and gas-related activities by foreign companies.
Furthermore, U.S. and U.N. sanctions imposed on Libya in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s discouraged foreign participation and restricted the available resources required for exploration and development (Arab Petroleum Research Center, 1998; Petzet, 1999).
In the late 1980’s, however, new terms to encourage foreign interest were introduced, which were still in effect as of 1996.
From the late 1970’s until the late 1980’s, the exploration and production of fields in a portion of offshore Tunisia and Libya were suspended pending adjudication of the Tunisian-Libyan demarcation line in the Gulf of Gabes (Nelson, 1979).
The conflict was resolved in 1988 when Libya and Tunisia agreed to create a joint oil exploration company to operate in this area (called the 7th November concession) (Arab Petroleum Research Center, 1998).
A large portion of the Pelagian Province is offshore (figure 1), and water depths in that portion are generally less than 400 m.
The greatest water depth is in the Malta Trough, which has a maximum depth of 1,715 m (Jongsma and others, 1985).
As of 1996, wells were drilled in water as deep as 351 m (Petroconsultants, 1996a).
A basic infrastructure has been established in the Pelagian Province whereby tanker terminals and a pipeline network are capable of transporting petroleum from most of the major producing fields to port cities in Tunisia and Libya (Arab Petroleum Research Center, 1998).
