Roberts and others (2008) modeled the burial history, thermal maturity, and timing of petroleum generation for Cretaceous and Tertiary source rocks at eight locations in the Bighorn Basin that differ in structural settings and represent deep, intermediate, and shallow burial depths.
Two types of modeling were performed at each location to predict the timing and type of hydrocarbon generation from Type-III gas-prone source rocks, and from Type-II oil-prone source rocks.
They are (1) time-temperature modeling based on vitrinite reflectance, and (2) kinetic modeling based on time- temperature integrated with the results of hydrous-pyrolysis experiments.
Time-temperature modeling predicts critical levels of thermal maturity based on vitrinite reflectance by integrating burial and thermal history and time to model gas generation from Type-III gas-prone source rocks.
The results, summa- rized from Roberts and others (2008) in figure 28, indicate that in areas where source rocks were buried the deepest, gas generation from Type-III source rocks started in the early Paleocene (about 63 Ma for Cretaceous source rocks) to early Eocene (52 Ma for Fort Union source rocks), reached peak generation by early to middle Eocene (44 Ma for Cretaceous source rocks), and ended only at the Emblem Bench loca- tion by the late Miocene (12 Ma for Frontier source rocks).
The results are similar for source rocks buried at intermediate depths, except that Mesaverde and Meeteetse did not reach peak generation until later in the Eocene to early Miocene (47 to 15 Ma) and Fort Union source rocks did not reach peak generation.
Timing of gas generation from source rocks buried at shallower depths, ranges from onset of gas from the middle Paleocene (60 Ma for the Thermopolis) to early Oligocene (33 Ma for the Fort Union) and peak generation was reached only in the Thermopolis, Mowry, Frontier, and Cody source rocks from middle Eocene (47 Ma) to early Miocene (23 Ma).
Sometime after middle Miocene time (about 10 Ma), the region was uplifted (including the Bighorn Basin), resulting in the exhumation of the basin-bounding mountain ranges and removal of large volumes of the basin"ôs sedimentary fill (Love, 1988).
Subsequently, the basin cooled significantly reducing the rates of gas generation during the last 10 Ma (Roberts and others, 2008).
Kinetic models were generated for these same well locations to model oil generation from Type-II oil-prone kerogen.
Kinetic modeling by Roberts and others (2008) used time and temperature integrated with results from laboratory hydrous-pyrolysis experiments by Lewan and Ruble (2002) and Tsuzuki and others (1999) to predict the timing and type of hydrocarbon generation.
The results of this modeling, using hydrous-pyrolysis kinetic parameters, are summarized in figure 29.
The results indicate that in areas where oil-prone source rocks of the Thermopolis and Mowry Shales were (1) buried the deepest, oil generation occurred from late Paleo- cene to middle Eocene (58 to 47 Ma); (2) buried at intermedi- ate depths, oil generation occurred from late Paleocene to late Eocene (58 to 35 Ma); and (3) buried to shallowest depths, oil generation occurred in early Eocene (52 Ma) and ended only at Dobie Creek by early Miocene (19 Ma).
Continued burial in the deeper part of the basin elevated maturities to a level suf- ficient to initiate cracking of oil to gas between about 37 Ma and 16 Ma; however, transformation ratios are only between 2 and 9 percent, indicating that the cracking of oil to gas does not contribute significantly to the gas potential of the basin (Roberts and others, 2008).
As with gas generation rates of oil generation during the last 10 Ma have slowed due to post- middle Miocene regional uplift and exhumation of the basin (Roberts and others, 2008).
