The Travis Peak Formation of Texas and southern Arkansas and the correlative Hosston Formation of Louisiana form a basinward-thickening wedge of terrigenous clastic sedimentary rocks that underlies the northern Gulf of Mexico Basin from east Texas across northern Louisiana to southern Mississippi, southern Alabama, and the Florida panhandle.
The thickness of the Travis Peak Formation ranges from less than 1,000 ft in southern Arkansas to more than 3,200 ft in north-central Louisiana (pls. 1, 2).
The downdip limit of the Travis Peak Formation has not been delineated by drilling to date.
Travis Peak strata crop out in parts of Brown, Mills, McCulloch, San Saba, and Lampasas Counties in east-central Texas (west of the area covered in this report) (Hartman and Scranton, 1992).
Across the hydrocarbon-productive trend of the Travis Peak Formation (figures 1A–1C), the depth to top of the Travis Peak ranges from about 4,000 ft subsea in southern Arkansas to more than 18,000 ft subsea in north-central Louisiana and southern Mississippi (Saucier, 1985) (pl. 3).
Although Travis Peak sandstones produce gas from drilling depths of more than 16,000 ft in southern Mississippi (Thomson, 1978), most Travis Peak production across the main producing trend in east Texas and northern Louisiana is from drilling depths between 6,000 and 10,000 ft (Dutton and others, 1993).
Travis Peak production across east Texas and northern Louisiana is primarily gas, but includes some oil (figures 1A and B).
The Travis Peak is the lowest formation of the Lower Cretaceous Trinity Group, which overlies the Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous Cotton Valley Group (figure 2).
The Cotton Valley Group and Travis Peak Formation represent the first two major sequences of terrigenous clastic sediment shed into the Gulf of Mexico Basin following its initial formation during continental rifting in Late Triassic time (Salvador, 1987; Worrall and Snelson, 1989).
The oldest sedimentary deposits in the northern part of the Gulf of Mexico Basin (figures 2 and 3) include Upper Triassic and Lower Jurassic nonmarine red beds of the Eagle Mills Formation, the thick Middle Jurassic evaporite sequence known as the Werner Anhydrite and Louann Salt, and the nonmarine Jurassic Norphlet Formation (Shreveport Geological Society, 1987).
Following a major regional marine transgression across the Norphlet, regressive carbonates of the Upper Jurassic Smackover Formation were deposited.
The Smackover was capped by red beds and evaporites of the Buckner Formation (figure 2).
A subsequent minor marine transgression is recorded by the Gilmer Limestone (“Cotton Valley limestone”) in east Texas, although equivalent facies in northern Louisiana and Mississippi are terrigenous clastic rocks known as the Haynesville Formation.
The marine Bossier Shale, lowermost formation of the Cotton Valley Group (figure 2), was deposited conformably atop the Gilmer or Haynesville, followed by progradation of the major fluvial-deltaic sequence known locally as the “Cotton Valley sandstone” or Schuler Formation.
A significant marine transgression that halted Cotton Valley fluvial-deltaic sedimentation is recorded by the Knowles Limestone, the uppermost formation of the Cotton Valley Group (figures 2 and 4).
Prodelta and fluvial-deltaic deposits of the Travis Peak Formation overlie the Knowles Limestone and mark the second major influx of terrigenous clastic sediments into the northern Gulf of Mexico Basin.
In updip parts of the Gulf of Mexico Basin, the Knowles Limestone pinches out, and Travis Peak fluvial-deltaic strata rest directly on Schuler Formation fluvial-deltaic units of the Cotton Valley Group (figure 4).
Whereas most workers consider the Knowles/Travis Peak contact to be conformable, controversy exists regarding the presence or absence of an unconformity between the updip Schuler and Travis Peak Formations.
McFarlan (1977), Todd and Mitchum (1977), and Tye (1989) identified a major unconformity between the Schuler and Travis Peak, whereas Nichols and others (1968) and Saucier (1985) considered the contact to be conformable.
Most workers agree that the upper contact of the Travis Peakwith overlying shallow-marine carbonates of the Lower Cretaceous Sligo Formation is conformable.
Most of the 15-m.y. period of Travis Peak deposition occurred during a relative rise in sea level (McFarlan, 1977; Vail and others, 1977), and the Travis Peak/Sligo contact is a time-transgressive boundary such that the Sligo oolitic and micritic limestones onlap the Travis Peak coastal and marine clastic rocks to the north out of the Gulf of Mexico Basin (Tye, 1991) (figures 2 and 4).
The thick Jurassic Louann Salt became mobile as a result of sediment loading and associated basinward tilting in Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous time.
Salt movement was initiated during deposition of the Smackover Formation and became more extensive with influx of the thick sequence of Cotton Valley and Travis Peak clastic sediments (McGowen and Harris, 1984).
Many Cotton Valley and Travis Peak fields in east Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi have structural or combination traps associated with Louann Salt movement.
Salt structures range from small, low-relief salt pillows to large piercement domes (McGowen and Harris, 1984; Kosters and others, 1989).
The Sabine uplift (figure 3) is a broad, low-relief, basement-cored arch separating the East Texas and northern Louisiana Salt Basins.
With vertical relief of about 2,000 ft, the Sabine uplift covers an area of more than 2,500 mi2 (Kosters and others, 1989).
Isopach data across the uplift indicate that it was a positive feature during deposition of Louann Salt in the Jurassic, but that primary uplift occurred in the late mid-Cretaceous (101–98 Ma) and again in the early Tertiary (58–46 Ma) (Laubach and Jackson, 1990; Jackson and Laubach, 1991).
As a relatively high area during the past 60 m.y., the Sabine uplift has been a focal point for hydrocarbon migration in the northern Gulf of Mexico Basin.
Numerous smaller structural highs on the Sabine uplift in the form of domes, anticlines, and structural noses provide traps for hydrocarbon accumulations, including many oil and gas fields with Travis Peak reservoirs.
