The Mesaverde Sandstone Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50340264) is a hypothetical AU that is believed to have the potential to produce gas from low permeability fluvial and marginal marine sandstone reservoirs in the Mesaverde Formation.
The AU encompasses approximately 345 mi2 in the central part of the Bighorn Basin (figure 39).
The north, east, and south boundaries were drawn using sparse well data that generally outlines areas where drillstem tests indicate greater than normal pressure gradients and (or) mud logs record continuous gas shows in the downdip areas along the deep trough of the basin (Johnson and Finn, 1998b).
The west boundary is projected beneath the Oregon Basin thrust fault and is drawn approximately at the cutoff of the Mesaverde Formation in the footwall of the fault (Stone, 1993; Taylor, 1998).
Drilling depths range from about 12,500 to 17,500 ft (figure 40).
Because it is classed as hypothetical, analogs were used in the assessment of this AU, including Mesaverde production at Muddy Ridge (Johnson and others, 2007), and Lance/Fort Union production at Sand Mesa from the Wind River Basin, Wyoming (Troy Cook, written commun., 2008).
These areas were chosen because they represent production from lenticular fluvial sandstones in areas with lower thermal maturities similar to levels in the Bighorn Basin, and because they are not associated with major anticlinal structures.
The Mesaverde Sandstone Continuous Gas AU is essentially unexplored, with only four wells penetrating the Mesaverde section, only one of which reported gas production from the formation (figure 39).
According to Cardinal and others (1989), the Sellers Draw Unit 1(see figure 39 for location) was initially completed in the Muddy Sandstone in 1978 at a depth of about 19,500 ft.
According to the Wyoming Oil and Gas Conservation Commission (WOGCC), the well was shut-in in 1997, then was recently recompleted in the Mesaverde at a depth of about 16,100 ft.
At the time of this assessment there was not enough production history of the well to determine if the well will ultimately make the minimum of 0.02 BCFG to qualify as a producer, therefore the AU is considered hypothetical and essentially 100 percent untested.
Input data for the assessment are shown on the FORSPAN ASSESSMENT MODEL FORM in Appendix D.
The minimum and maximum areas assigned to the AU are 199,000 and 243,000 acres, respectively, with a calculated mean of 221,000 acres; this wide range is because little is known about subsurface structure along the west boundary and because of the uncertainty over the other boundaries owing to the lack of well data.
The minimum and maximum percentages of the untested AU area that has potential for additions to reserves are 0.2 and 8.5 percent, respectively, with a calculated mean of 3.6 percent (Appendix D).
These percentages represent well success-ratios (from the Wind River Basin analogs) applied to possible ìsweet spots,î where reservoir permeability may be enhanced by fracture development associated with Laramide compressional features (anticlinal trends and thrust faults) and normal faulting associated with post-Laramide extension.
The minimum, median, and maximum total recovery per cell for untested cells having potential for additions to reserves is 0.02, 0.2, and 5 BCFG, respectively, with a calculated mean of 0.34 BCFG (Appendix D).
These values are based on the EUR distribution from the analog areas in the Wind River Basin, but are lower because of the overall lower volume of potential sandstone reservoir rock in the Mesaverde section in the Bighorn Basin as compared to the Wind River Basin (figure 41).
The minimum and maximum area per cell of untested cells having the potential for additions to reserves is 20 and 180 acres, respectively, with a calculated mean of 83.3 acres and a mode of 50 acres.
These values are also from the Mesaverde analogs in the Wind River Basin, the smaller values reflecting potential future production from lenticular fluvial sandstone bodies and the larger values reflecting potential future production from blanket-like marginal marine sandstones (Johnson and others, 2007).
The mean estimate for undiscovered gas resources that have potential for additions to reserves in the Mesaverde Sandstone Continuous Gas AU (50340264) is 32 BCFG; tabulated assessment results are summarized in table 1.
