The Lower Cretaceous Travis Peak Formation of east Texas and southern Arkansas (and the correlative Hosston Formation of Louisiana and Mississippi) is a basinward-thickening wedge of terrigenous clastic sedimentary rocks that underlies the northern Gulf of Mexico Basin from east Texas across northern Louisiana to southern Mississippi.
Clastic detritus was derived from two main fluvial-deltaic depocenters, one in northeastern Texas and the other extending from southeastern Mississippi northwestward into northeastern Louisiana.
Across the main hydrocarbon-productive trend in east Texas and northern Louisiana, the Travis Peak and Hosston Formations are about 2,000 ft thick.
The most likely sources for hydrocarbons in Travis Peak and Hosston reservoirs are two stratigraphically lower units, lime mudstones of the Upper Jurassic Smackover Formation and organic-rich shales of the Upper Jurassic Bossier Shale of the Cotton Valley Groupage As a result of the absence of proximal source rocks and a lack of effective migration pathways from stratigraphically or geographically distant source rocks, hydrocarbon charge is sufficient for development of conventional gas accumulations but insufficient for development of basin-centered gas.
The petroleum assessment of the Travis Peak and Hosston Formations was conducted by using a total petroleum system model.
A total petroleum system includes all of the important elements of a hydrocarbon fluid system needed to develop oil and gas accumulations, including source and reservoir rocks, hydrocarbon generation, migration, traps and seals, and undiscovered accumulations.
A total petroleum system is mappable and may include one or more assessment units.
For each assessment unit, reservoir rocks contain similar geology, exploration characteristics, and risk.
The Jurassic Smackover Interior Salt Basins Total Petroleum System is defined for this assessment to include (1) Upper Jurassic Smackover carbonates and calcareous shales and organic-rich shales of the Upper Jurassic Bossier Shale of the Cotton Valley Group and (2) Lower Cretaceous Travis Peak and Hosston Formations.
The Jurassic Smackover Interior Salt Basins Total Petroleum System includes three conventional Travis Peak–Hosston assessment units: Travis Peak–Hosston Gas and Oil (AU 50490205), Travis Peak–Hosston Updip Oil (AU 50490206), and Travis Peak–Hosston Hypothetical Updip Oil (AU 50490207).
A fourth assessment unit, the Hosston Hypothetical Slope-Basin Gas Assessment Unit, was named and numbered (AU 50490208) but not geologically defined or quantitatively assessed owing to a lack of data.
Together, assessment units 50490205 to 50490207 are estimated to contain a mean undiscovered conventional resource of 29 million barrels of oil, 1,136 billion cubic feet of gas, and 22 million barrels of natural gas liquids.
