Known only in the subsurface, the Lower Cretaceous Sunniland Formation is the basal unit of the Ocean Reef Group (figure 2).
Onshore, the formation is relatively uniform in thickness and consists of limestone, dolomite, and anhydrite.
The upper part of the Sunniland Formation produces heavy, marginally mature varieties of crude oil onshore from porous bio-clastic debris mounds, banks, and pods on the eastern margin of the South Florida Basin.
The region of productive reservoir facies of the upper Sunniland Formation is defined in part by eight fields that have either produced more than one million barrels of oil (MMBO), or have estimated ultimate recoveries (EUR) of at least 1 MMBO, and five additional smaller fields.
When combined, these fields form an arcuate northwest-southeast trend, the “Sunniland trend,” which is about 20 mi wide and 150 mi long (figure 3).
Generally, the updip limit of the Sunniland is about 50 to 60 miles northeast of the producing trend.
The first upper Sunniland Formation oil field discovery was the Sunniland field in 1943; the largest oil field is the West Felda, discovered in 1966, with total production (through July 1993) of more than 44 MMBO.
Cumulative production for all upper Sunniland Formation reservoirs through July 1993 was about 103 MMBO.
The northern and updip play boundary for the Upper Sunniland Tidal Shoal Oil play (5001) is delineated by an area in which the upper Sunniland Formation consists of only micritic limestone and contains no reservoir mounds within its intertidal lagoonal-mudflat facies.
Moreover, the lower part of the Sunniland dark carbonate source rock is absent.
The downdip southern boundary of the play is delineated by an area where wells penetrate an anhydrite-cemented, nonporous sabkha-like facies (figure 3).
The reservoir facies in the upper Sunniland Formation consist of isolated fossil-shell hash (skeletal grainstones) that may represent storm deposition as shoals in a regionally restricted, backreef lagoonal area in the warm, shallow marine-shelf setting of the eastern South Florida Basin during the late Early Cretaceous (Mitchell-Tapping, 1987).
These tidal shoals were deposited on subtle bathymetric highs that were probably related to underlying basement structure.
Later, the upper portions of these porous shoal mounds were subaeri-ally exposed, leached, and dolomitized during a low sealevel stand, further enhancing the reservoir quality of the upper porous zones.
Individual debris mounds are about 40 to 100 ft thick (Means, 1977; Montgomery, 1987).
Depth to the upper Sunniland Formation tidal shoal reservoir rocks in the producing trend is about 11,200 to 11,600 ft.
Most mounds are sealed by overlying impermeable lagoonal mudstones and wacke-stones, some of which have been dolomitized.
Porosities of primary (interparticle) and secondary (dissolution and dolomitization) origin range from 10 to 25 percent and average 15 to 18 percent (Mitchell-Tapping, 1987).
Impermeable micritic carbonate and nodular anhydrite beds within the upper Sunniland Formation enclose and seal many of the individual porous reservoir mounds.
Moreover, the entire Sunniland Formation is sealed above and below by thick anhydrite units (figure 2).
Most hydrocarbon traps are stratigraphic; however, some mixed stratigraphic/structural traps are present.
The different types of crude oils produced from the grain-stone units of the upper Sunniland Formation are immature, having API gravities that range from about 21° to 28° and average 25°–26°; the average gas-oil ratio (GOR) is about 85:1 (Palacas and others, 1984; Tootle, 1991).
The source rocks are a dark, micritic carbonate unit (informally referred to as the “dark carbonate” interval) in the lower part of the Sunniland Formation.
These micritic carbonates are commonly algal laminated and have total organic carbon (TOC) ranging from less than 0.4 to 3.0 weight percent.
Potential source rocks (as identified by more than 0.4 weight percent TOC) average 1.8 weight percent TOC.
More than 80 percent of the organic matter in these source rocks is composed of algal-amorphous (oil-prone) kerogen (Palacas, 1984; Palacas and others, 1984).
The hydrocarbon-generating potential of the lower Sunniland dark carbonate facies ranges from poor in wells located updip from the producing trend, to good in wells located just down-dip, to excellent near the depocenter of the basin (Applegate and Pontigo, 1984).
Onshore, the dark carbonate facies varies in thickness from zero at the updip limit of the Sunniland Formation to more than 150 ft in the producing trend.
Oil produced from reservoirs in the Sunniland trend was probably generated downdip where the organic matter in the dark carbonate facies is more abundant and more mature.
The petroleum then migrated updip and accumulated in the porous grainstone facies of the upper Sunniland (Palacas and others, 1984).
Exploration and development of the upper Sunniland Formation has been minimal based on the drilling history and well distribution within the play area.
The eight oil fields in the upper Sunniland Formation that have produced, or have EUR’s, more than 1 MMBO are Bear Island, Corkscrew, West Felda, Lehigh Park, Mid-Felda, Raccoon Point, Sunniland, and Sunoco-Felda.
Historical data for these eight accumulations are plotted in figure 4 and figure 5 showing relations among known accumulation size, number of exploratory wells, date of discovery, and cumulative known volume.
At least three of these eight fields are located in the Big Cypress Swamp drainage and (or) National Reserve, an area of critical environmental concern (Lloyd, 1992).
Sensitive environmental and political issues in south Florida have likely discouraged full resource development; however, the success of wells drilled in the past few decades, indicate that the Upper Sunniland Tidal Shoal Oil play has good potential.
The 1995 USGS Assessment estimated undiscovered oil accumulations in the Upper Sunniland play along the main fairway trend (5001) to be of moderate size, having a median size of 15 MMBO and total undiscovered oil estimated at about 254 million barrels (table 1).
