The triangular-shaped North Ustyurt basin occupies the northern part of the Ustyurt Plateau in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan and adjacent lowland areas.
The basin area is approximately 250,000 km2, most of which is onshore.
Only small parts of the basin are in the Caspian Sea and Aral Lake (figure 1).
The northwestern basin boundary is concealed by thin Mesozoic and Tertiary sediments; it is drawn along the southern flank of the Paleozoic South Emba high (figure 2).
The high is marked by large positive gravity and magnetic anomalies that probably are related to the presence of Middle Devonian and older(?) volcanics (Kan and Tropp, 1996).
Thick Upper Devonian–Visean deformed graywacke clastics occur between the volcanics and thin (500–600 m) Mesozoic sediments in the central zone of the high.
The South Emba high plunges southwestward and the geophysical anomalies disappear in nearshore and offshore areas of the Caspian Sea, where the boundary between the North Ustyurt and North Caspian basins is poorly defined.
This boundary is drawn conditionally along the pinch-out zone of Kungurian (Lower Permian) salt.
The exact location of the pinch-out zone is difficult to determine from seismic sections; some geologists have suggested that the salt extends into the marginal areas of the North Ustyurt basin (Babadzhanov and others, 1986).
The southern basin boundary extends along the Central Mangyshlak and Central Ustyurt uplifts (figure 2).
The central Mangyshlak uplift is a structurally inverted and deformed Late Permian–Triassic rift.
In the presentday structure, it is a foldbelt composed of a series of thrust anticlines.
Synrift clastics are exposed in cores of the structurally highest anticlines.
The Central Ustyurt uplift is a Hercynian suture that is covered by thin Jurassic-Cretaceous sediments.
Below these sediments, several wells penetrated middle Paleozoic(?) partially metamorphosed clastic, carbonate, and volcanic rocks (Letavin, 1980).
The western continuation of the suture is unknown; probably it is buried beneath the younger Central Mangyshlak rift.
The eastern basin boundary has not been drilled; most of it is offshore in the Aral Lake.
On the basis of seismic data, the basin is bounded by the north-trending Aral-Kizylkum uplift (figure 2).
Across this uplift, upper Paleozoic platform formations of the North Ustyurt basin are in contact with contemporaneous deformed and metamorphosed basement rocks of the East Aral basin, whereas Jurassic and younger formations are continuous between the basins.
The North Ustyurt basin is a simple, deep, Jurassic-Tertiary sag that unconformably overlies more complex and poorly known pre-Jurassic structures.
The age of the basement is not known; age estimates include Early Proterozoic, similar to the age of basement of the Russian craton (Khain, 1977), Late Proterozoic (Milanovsky, 1987), or late Paleozoic Hercynian (Letavin, 1980).
Seismic and limited drilling data indicate that the basement of the basin probably is not a homogeneous block (Babadzhanov and others, 1986).
The southern zone of relative uplifts, where the basement is at depths of 5.5–8 km (Sholtau and Yarkinbay highs, Arstan step, and Barsakelmes depression in figure 2), forms a stable block of granite crust of possible Precambrian age (Babadzhanov and others, 1986).
The northern zone of deep (9–11 km) basement (Beyneu, Sam, and Kosbulak depressions in figure 2) possibly has oceanic or thinned transitional crust.
Limited drilling and seismic data indicate that the basement of the Sudochi depression is Caledonian in age.
It is composed of thick, lower Paleozoic, slightly metamorphosed, deepwater shales and small blocks of Precambrian crust.
These rocks were deformed in the Early Devonian; they were overlain by Early– Middle Devonian orogenic molasse clastics and were intruded by granites (Abidov and others, 1997).
This basement composition is similar to that of the Central Kazakhstan high (Paleozoic Kazakhstan continent), indicating a possible genetic affinity of this high with the North Ustyurt block.
During Late Devonian through Early Permian time, the North Ustyurt basin developed as a cratonic block.
Rocks of that age are platform-type carbonates and clastics that unconformably overlie various older deposits.
Seismic data show development of a relatively deep water Carboniferous basin in the Sudochi depression and offshore in the southern Aral Lake (Pilipenko, 1990).
The collision time of the North Ustyurt block with the Russian craton margin along the South Emba suture is poorly de.ned.
Judging from the geology of the northwest slope of the South Emba high in the North Caspian basin, the time of collision probably was prelate Visean; alternatively it may have been Early Permian (Artinskian).
Collision along the southern basin suture occurred in Early Permian time.
The eastern boundary suture also is Hercynian (Late Carbonif-erous–Early Permian); it was formed by collision of the Kaza­khstan continent and the Russian craton.
Hercynian deformations in the North Ustyurt basin are deeply buried and poorly known.
Significant uplifts may be deduced from the presence of thick Artinskian clastic clinoforms north of the South Emba high (Sapozhnikov and others, 1986).
The clastic material was derived from the North Ustyurt block.
Late Permian–Triassic rifting in the area of the present Central Mangyshlak uplift along the southern border of the North Ustyurt block indicates post-collisional relaxation and north-south extension.
However, thick continental clastic sediments of the same age were derived from the Hercynian terrane on the east, where orogeny apparently continued.
The next and most important stage of deformation in the basin took place in latest Triassic or earliest Jurassic time; it was related to closing of paleo-Tethys in the south and collision of the Iran and other continental blocks with the Eurasian Tethyan margin.
The Central Mangyshlak rift was compressed, inverted, and deformed, and thrusting occurred in some areas of the North Ustyurt block.
Especially intense thrusting took place on the Buzachi Peninsula and offshore (figure 3); however, reverse faults and thrusts in Triassic rocks also are known from seismic surveys in more eastern basin areas.
Since Jurassic time, the North Ustyurt basin developed as a gentle sag, in which sediments as thick as 5 km were deposited.
Only mild deformations, some of which were rejuvenated movements along Triassic thrusts, are known.
Uplift and formation of the presentday Ustyurt Plateau took place in post-Sarmatian time.
Dense Sarmatian (upper Miocene) limestones and sandstones armor the surface of the plateau and prevent it from erosion.
The main features of regional structure of the Jurassic-Tertiary sedimentary cover are shown in figure 2. The southern and central zones of the basin are relatively uplifted.
In these zones, the surface of Jurassic rocks gently dips northward from depths of 2–2.5 km in the south to 3–3.5 km in the north.
Farther north, the uplifted zones are bordered by a system of depressions, in which the Jurassic surface lies at depths of 4–4.5 km and the base of the Jurassic is at 5 km and deeper.
The system includes the Beyneu, Sam, and Kosbulak depressions (figure 2).
Still farther to the north, the depressions grade to the gentle southern slope of the South Emba high.
Post-Triassic structure of the Buzachi Peninsula has been mapped in detail because this area contains most of the discovered petroleum reserves of the North Ustyurt basin.
The core of the structure is the Buzachi arch (figure 3), with closure of about 3 km.
On the crest of the arch, the base of Jurassic rocks is at a depth of less than 1 km, and Cretaceous rocks crop out.
The arch dips northward abruptly into the Beyneu depression and its offshore continuation and dips gently southward into the South Buzachi depression.
Both the arch and the South Buzachi depression contain several zones of linear asymmetric anticlines that are expressed in Jurassic and younger strata (figure 3).
The anticlinal zones are underlain by blind thrusts in Triassic rocks and extend offshore.
The structural framework of older parts of the sedimentary cover is virtually unknown because the thickness of Upper Permian–Triassic red beds is great (2.5–3 km) and older rocks have been penetrated by only a few wells.
Available data, although scarce and commonly of uncertain reliability, suggest that there are three total petroleum systems (TPS) in the North Ustyurt basin.
One composite petroleum system is identified in the Buzachi region in the western part of the basin, and two other stratigraphically stacked TPS cover the rest of the basin area (figure 1).
The Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS produces oil from Jurassic and Cretaceous reservoirs and contains most of the hydrocarbon reserves of the basin.
The TPS is defined conjecturally because the source rocks for the oil are unknown and probably are absent from the area.
If hydrocarbons migrated from the north, as interpreted herein, the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS may actually be a part of the North Caspian Paleozoic Total Petroleum System, although geologically the area is part of the North Ustyurt basin.
The North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS encompasses Jurassic and younger sedimentary rocks of the basin area east of the Buzachi Arch and Surrounding Areas Composite TPS.
A few small oil and gas discoveries are mainly in Jurassic sandstones.
Source rocks are Jurassic continental coaly shales and possible intervening lacustrine beds.
Dry gas in four fields in the northern part of the basin is in shallow Eocene sandstone reservoirs, and the origin of this gas is uncertain.
Possibly it is from the same Jurassic source, or it is biogenic in origin.
The existence of the North Ustyurt Paleozoic TPS, as a separate and distinct petroleum system that underlies the North Ustyurt Jurassic TPS, is indicated by commercial flows of gas from Carboniferous carbonates in two fields in the southeastern part of the basin.
Source rocks for the gas are unknown.
The extent of the North Ustyurt Paleozoic TPS to the west is uncertain, and the western boundary of the TPS shown in figure 1 is conjectural.
