Offshore Egypt has one of the most promising gas fields in the world, representing deepwater turbidite proximal channel sands and distal thinly bedded turbidities sands.
Detailed high-resolution electrofacies analysis has been extracted for better understanding of offshore Nile Delta wells drilled in the Abu Madi and Kafr-El Sheikh formations.
The studied Late Miocene- Pliocene succession shows an overall retrogradational pattern and a fining-upward depositional motif.
Pressure points and samples have been taken over the potential thin-bedded turbiditic channel levee complex, and it shows the presence of gas in this unit.
As a result of these integrated analyses, twenty meters of thin-bedded channel levee complex has been perforated and proved to be a gas-bearing zone.
Perforation results revealed the productivity and economic potential of the added thin-bedded reservoir pay.
The studied prospect lies in the northern part of the West El-Burullus Offshore concession area, about 65 km from El-Burullus Lake.
It is located approximately 15km south east of Taurus and Libra gas fields and approximately 7km southwest of Sequoia gas field.
The West El Burullus Offshore concession covers an area of 726 km2 in the western side of the offshore Nile Delta (Figure 1).
The studied prospect consists of several geological events composed mainly of deep marine canyons, which are made of several slope fans.
These incised canyons have been formed as a result of major regressive event followed by successive and alternating transgressive and regressive cycles.
There are also two targets allocated within the late Miocene fluvial valleys that were deposited within the shelf area after the Messinian salinity crisis.
They are considered part of the mega Abu Qir fluvial system.
The exploration activity in the studied field commenced with drilling the first well targeting Pliocene slope channel turbidites complex of Kafr El Sheikh Formation and Messinian Fluvio-Marine channels of Abu Madi Formation (Figure2).
The presence of gas in the studied reservoir is supported by a seismic amplitude anomaly.
On a cross section, it shows typical lenticular geometries of a channel-levee complex (Figure 3).
The sand count proved the presence of thinly bedded gas bearing reservoir in Kafr El-Sheikh, which has been confirmed by the pressure of an open-hole perforation test.
This thinly bedded unit has increased the reserve estimate in the field.
The general depositional facies in the field shows overall retrogradational patterns and a fining-upward depositional motif.
The sandstone facies of the Abu Madi formation in the field was interpreted as a sandy estuarine complex facies, which were deposited in the proximal setting to the sand supply and represents the best quality and cleanest facies.
The sandstone facies of Kafr El-Sheikh formation were interpreted as submarine channel fill-levee complex, and the thinly bedded gas-bearing reservoir was interpreted as inter-channels proximal levee facies.
