The Cretaceous-Tertiary Composite Total Petroleum System (TPS 503402) produces oil and natural gas from predominantly sandstone reservoirs in anticlinal traps around the margins of the Bighorn Basin (figure 18).
The TPS covers most of the central part of the basin and encompasses approximately 7,900 mi2.
The south, east, and northeast boundaries are defined generally as the base of Cretaceous outcrops (figure 18).
The north boundary is drawn to include the production along the Nye-Bowler lineament and coincides with the province boundary.
The northwest boundary along the Beartooth Mountain front is drawn at the contact between Precambrian crystalline rocks and younger sedimentary rocks.
South of the Beartooth Mountains the TPS boundary extends to the eastern limit of the Absaroka volcanics, with the exception of the area in the vicinity of Rattlesnake Mountain where it is defined as the base of exposed Cretaceous rocks (figure1).
Within the TPS some areas were excluded with respect to resource potential (for example, Sheep Mountain and Thermopolis anticlines, figure 1) because of being eroded deeply enough to have removed all Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks.
Stratigraphically, the TPS includes reservoirs that range from Early Cretaceous to Paleocene in age (figure 7).
Geochemical studies have identified two oil types in addition to those associated with the Permian Phosphoria Formation, both with characteristics of Cretaceous source rocks.
One oil type appears to be sourced from the Thermopolis Shale and is produced mainly from Muddy Sandstone reservoirs, whereas the second has characteristics of oils derived from the Mowry Shale and is produced mainly from Frontier Formation reservoirs (P.G. Lillis, written commun., 2007).
Geochemical data also show that there has been little or no mixing of the two oil types, indicating that the Cretaceous section could theoretically be divided into two separate TPSs.
However, gas isotope studies by Johnson and Keighin (1998) indicate that there has been extensive vertical migration of thermogenic gases from deep mature source rocks into shallow reservoirs that are immature with respect to thermogenic gas generation; in some cases, these gases have mixed with biogenic methane generated at the shallower depths.
Therefore, because of the extensive vertical migration and comingling of gases described by Johnson and Keighin (1998), and the difficulty in differentiating gas types and assigning them to specific source rocks, all Cretaceous and Tertiary source rocks, reservoirs, and accumulations have been assigned to one composite TPS for this assessment.
