Existing fields in the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province produce mostly from structural traps; these are mainly anticlines and faulted structures (Petroconsultants, 1996).
Most of the reservoirs in fluvio-deltaic and marine sandstones of the Hollin and Napo Formations are in structures that involve low-relief north-south oriented anticlines of two distinct types: (1) footwall anticlines associated with normal faults and (2) hanging wall anticlines associated with reverse faults (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990).
East-to-west thinning of the Hollin and Napo reservoir units in the Oriente Basin also contributes to the formation of stratigraphic traps (White and others, 1995).
These formations originated as mostly eastward sourced fluvial and deltaic sediments that prograded westward along with deposition of marine shoreline and shelf mudstones and sandstones.
Primary stratigraphic traps are formed by termination of porous and permeable fluvial or marine sandstone facies against lower energy mudstone and mudstone-sandstone depositional sequences.
Handford and Kairuz (2000) categorized sequence boundaries for the Villeta and Caballos Formations in the Putumayo Basin; they indicated that “potentially large stratigraphic traps” may occur as a result of onlap and pinchout of porous sandstones and limestones against marine shales.
Basin-Center Gas reservoir trap types (60410102) are commonly a combination of stratigraphic and structural.
D.K. Hig­ley, D.O. Cox, and R.J. Weimer have evaluated the reservoir geologic and engineering properties of the Wattenberg basin-center gas field, Denver Basin, Colorado, U.S.A.; the following characteristics of basin-center gas fields are largely a result of this research and its application as an analog to similar foreland basins, such as the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province.
Basin-center gas fields occur on flanks or in lows of basins as opposed to structural highs.
Typically, there is no gas-water contact, and reservoir intervals are low-permeability and normal to underpressured.
The major traps and seals are formed by inter-bedded and (or) overlying low-permeability mudstones or salts, pinch-out of reservoir intervals against “tight” sandstones or shales, facies change such as offshore marine sandstone bars that are isolated by marine shales, and fault offset of reservoir intervals with truncation against permeability barriers.
If Paleozoic reservoirs are present, the primary trap types are probably structural or a combination of stratigraphy and structure.
Structural traps would most likely be either truncation and offset by faults of reservoir intervals, or possible pinch-outs of sandstone (or dolomite beds?) against salt flow structures of Paleozoic evaporite zones or against the overlying Triassic salt.
Stratigraphic traps would probably be facies changes from sandstone to a less permeable facies.
