Dutton (1987) showed that shales interbedded with Travis Peak sandstone reservoirs in east Texas were deposited in fluvial-deltaic settings where organic matter commonly was oxidized and not preserved.
Because measured values of total organic carbon (TOC) in Travis Peak shales are generally less than 0.5 weight percent, these shales are not considered to be important hydrocarbon source rocks, according to Tissot and Welte (1978).
Dutton (1987) suggested that the most likely sources for hydrocarbons in Travis Peak reservoirs in east Texas are (1) prodelta and basinal marine shales of the Upper Jurassic Bossier Shale of the Cotton Valley Group and (2) laminated, lime mudstones of the lower member of the Jurassic Smackover Formation (figure 2).
Sassen and Moore (1988) demonstrated that Smackover carbonate mudstones are a significant hydrocarbon source rock in Mississippi and Alabama.
Wescott and Hood (1991) documented the Bossier Shale as a major source rock in east Texas.
Presley and Reed (1984) suggested that gray to black shales interbedded with Cotton Valley sandstones could be a significant source for gas in addition to the underlying Bossier Shale.
Coleman and Coleman (1981, page 76) stated that “hydrocarbons were generated from neighboring source beds.”
In summary, despite limited source-rock data, it seems likely that significant hydrocarbon source rocks occur in lower Smackover carbonate mudstones and the Bossier Shale of the Cotton Valley Group (figure 2).
We support a strong Smackover component for Cotton Valley hydrocarbons, particularly for oil-bearing reservoirs in the northern part of the region because of the known regional source potential of the Smackover (Lewan, 2002).
Because of the fluid behavior and complex history of gases, multiple source rocks and oil sources are considered likely.
The Jurassic Smackover Interior Salt Basins Total Petroleum System is defined for this assessment to include both Upper Jurassic Smackover carbonates and calcareous shales and Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous Cotton Valley Group organic-rich shales (figure 2; plate 4).
This total petroleum system could also include Travis Peak organic-rich shales, but we support Dutton’s (1987) interpretation of these sources as oxidized and not well preserved (see the next section).
