The play is characterized by gas and oil accumulations in dolomite and sandstone reservoirs in hanging-wall anticlines along three subparallel lines of folding within the Absaroka Thrust Plate.
The source is footwall Cretaceous shale.
The play contains nearly all the discovered fields in the province.
Fields on the eastern line of folds produce mainly oil with associated gas from Mesozoic rocks (mainly Nugget Sandstone); fields on the central line of folds produce primarily sour, wet gas and condensate from Paleozoic rocks (mainly Mission Canyon Limestone); and the western line of low-relief anticlinal folds produces minor wet gas and condensate, also from Paleozoic rocks.
The play area trends north-south for approximately 140 mi and ranges from 18 to 35 mi in width in northern Utah and southwestern Wyoming.
Play boundaries and fields are shown in figure 5.
High-quality reservoir rocks of demonstrated productive capacity range from Late Cretaceous to Ordovician in age and comprises 12 different formations.
The major producing reservoir on the eastern line of folds is the 1,000 ft thick eolian Jurassic Nugget Sandstone, which has recorded core porosity that ranges from 2 to 23 percent and permeability ranging from 0.1 to 2,000 mD.
Net pay thicknesses range as high as 850 ft.
The Nugget produces 44º API sweet oil and associated gas from 14 fields.
Other productive oil and gas reservoirs are found in the Triassic Ankareh and Thaynes Formations and Jurassic Twin Creek Limestone.
The primary reservoir on the central line of folding is the 750 ft thick Mission Canyon Limestone of the Mississippian Madison Groupage Data from core analysis in this unit shows porosity ranging from 6 to 8 percent and permeability ranging from 0.7 to 1.5 mD.
Production of sour gas (15 percent H2S) and condensate is from an average net pay zone (at Whitney Canyon-Carter Creek) about 260 ft thick in the Mission Canyon.
Other sour gas pay zones are in the Lodgepole Limestone, and the Darby and Phosphoria Formations, Weber Sandstone, and Bighorn Dolomite; minor sweet gas and condensate production occurs in Triassic and Jurassic reservoirs.
Sour gas production also occurs in two fields on the western line of folds from Mission Canyon and Bighorn reservoirs.
Organic-rich shale of Cretaceous age preserved in the footwall of the Absaroka Thrust has been well documented by geochemical analysis as the main source of all hydrocarbons trapped in hanging wall structures in the play.
The Absaroka Thrust rode on shale in the Cretaceous Bear River Formation, Aspen Shale, and Frontier Formation for about 15 mi in a west-east direction in the play.
Hanging-wall reservoir rocks are in direct contact with these subthrust shale source rocks across much of this distance.
Hydrocarbons were generated in the shales and migrated along fault pathways into reservoirs in the hanging wall in latest Cretaceous-Tertiary time.
Maximum total organic carbon (TOC) recorded from geochemical analysis of the Bear River, Aspen and Frontier is 9.3, 2.7, and 2.0 percent, respectively.
Kerogen in these units is mainly mixed Type II and Type III.
Preserved organic material is moderately oil-prone and becomes more gas-prone to the west as the percent of humic material increases, and as the maturation level of organic matter advances.
This has resulted in hydrocarbons being in the wet gas-condensate stage of maturation in fields along the central and west fold trends and in the oil stage in fields on the eastern trend.
Excellent shows and recoveries of both oil and gas from downhole testing are reported in footwall Cretaceous rocks in a few wells, but no wells have been successfully completed in this footwall section as yet.
Traps in productive structures on the fold trends are basically truncation anticlines complicated by faulting (Mesozoic or Paleozoic hanging-wall rocks truncate against the subjacent Absaroka Thrust).
Structural geometry of traps varies from asymmetric, overturned folds (Ryckman Creek), to leading-edge fold pair (Anschutz Ranch East west and east lobes), and upright fold (Whitney Canyon-Carter Creek).
Trap size ranges from 1 sq mi low-relief anticlines (Bessie Bottom), to giant accumulations such as Whitney Canyon-Carter Creek field, which has 1,470-2,500 ft of structural closure and a hydrocarbon column of 2,400 ft, and Anschutz Ranch East which has 2,000 ft of structural closure in the west lobe and 1,000 ft in the east lobe.
Maximum hydrocarbon column in the Anschutz Ranch East trap is 2,100 ft.
Major seals include anhydrite in the Twin Creek Limestone and salt in the Preuss Sandstone, where present, overlying Nugget oil reservoirs in the eastern fold trend, and anhydrite at the top of the Madison Group, along with thick shale in the Triassic section capping wet gas Paleozoic reservoirs in the two western lines of folds.
Drilling depths range from about 5,000 to more than 17,000 ft to footwall Cretaceous rocks beneath the Absaroka Thrust.
Between 1975, when Pineview field was discovered, and 1992, a total of 24 new fields (actively producing) had been found in both plays, 14 on the oil and associated gas productive eastern trend of folds and 10 on the wet gas and condensate productive central and western lines of folds.
Most recently (late 1993), substantial new oil production was found by horizontal drilling in the Elkhorn Ridge field in fractured Jurassic Twin Creek Limestone; this is the first horizontally drilled production in the play and in the province.
Cumulative production to the end of 1992 on the eastern trend is approximately 235 MMBO and 2.8 TCFG.
Four giant fields, Anschutz Ranch East, Painter Reservoir, Painter Reservoir East, and Pineview, have produced the bulk of the oil and gas in the play.
Cumulative production on the western fold trend from four fields reported is 18 MMB of oil and condensate and 1.1 TCFG; the giant Whitney Canyon-Carter Creek field accounted for more than 90 percent of this total.
The largest field in the play is Anschutz Ranch East with an estimated 1 BBOE ultimate recovery; Whitney Canyon-Carter Creek has an estimated ultimate recovery of 500 MMBOE (includes gas, condensate, sulfur, and NGL).
Seismic coverage in the northern half of the play is less than 10 percent of the dense coverage in the southern productive half, with only about 25 total wildcat wells drilled in the northern portion (north of Bighorn production at Collett Creek field).
Although the richly productive easterly trend of folds involving the Nugget Sandstone is essentially cut off by overriding of Paleozoic rocks some 10 mi north of Ryckman Creek field, the productive central and western fold trends persist into the sparsely explored northern half of the play.
The most northerly production (Bighorn Dolomite) in the play was established in the late 1980’s on the central fold trend at the Bridger Fork and Collett Creek fields; these oil and associated gas discoveries are located 3 and 5 mi, respectively, north of Bighorn gas and condensate production at the Road Hollow field.
Bear River and Frontier sandstone reservoirs in the Absaroka footwall have tested excellent flows of sweet gas and some liquids from intervals in the few wells that have penetrated this Cretaceous section in the play.
Future potential of the play ranges from good to excellent.
