The Mesaverde Total Petroleum System (TPS) in the Uinta and Piceance Basins (Uinta-Piceance Province), Utah and Colorado, produces mainly natural gas sourced primarily by coal and associated organic-rich (carbonaceous) strata (for example, shale and siltstone) in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde Group (for example, see Pitman and others, 1987; Johnson and Rice, 1990) (figure 1).
The Mesaverde TPS (designated by number 502002) encompasses about 20,000 mi2.
The TPS boundary is defined by the outcrop limits of the Mesaverde Group in the Wasatch Plateau and southern and central Uinta and Piceance Basins; in northern areas of both basins, the boundary is defined by the limits of the Uinta-Piceance province (figure 2), which generally follow the southern extent of Precambrian exposures in the Uinta Mountains.
East of the Uinta Mountains, the boundary generally follows the crest of the Axial Basin anticline.
Fields produce gas from the Mesaverde TPS throughout much of the Piceance Basin and the eastern half of the Uinta Basin (figure 3).
The total thickness of stratigraphic units within the Mesaverde TPS ranges from less than 1,500 ft along the Douglas Creek arch, which separates the Uinta and Piceance Basins (figure 4), to more than 10,000 ft in the deepest part of the Piceance Basin, and to more than 9,000 ft in the deepest part of the Uinta Basin.
Maximum depth to the base of the Mesaverde TPS is about 13,000 ft in the Piceance Basin and more than 19,000 ft in the much deeper Uinta Basin (figure 5).
The Mesaverde Total Petroleum System includes seven gas assessment units: two continuous gas assessment units (50200261 and 50200263), two transitional gas assessment units (50200262 and 50200264), two coalbed methane assessment units (50200281 and 50200282), and one conventional gas assessment unit (50200201).
Some oil is also produced, but the amount is so minor compared to the volume of gas that only the gas resources are considered in this study.
Rocks included in the Mesaverde TPS crop out throughout much of the Uinta-Piceance Province (figure 6).
Assignment of stratigraphic units to the system is based on the presence of gas-prone source rocks within the Mesaverde Group, and the presence of reservoirs producing gas that is interpreted to have migrated either vertically or up dip from these source rocks.
Based on these criteria, the Mesaverde TPS includes the lowest major coal zone within the Mesaverde Group (considered to be the source rocks), as well as potential reservoirs within overlying units in the Mesaverde Group, and in the North Horn, Colton, Fort Union, and Wasatch Formations.
In the Uinta Basin and Wasatch Plateau, the Mesaverde Group includes the Star Point Sandstone (Fisher and others, 1960), the Blackhawk, Price River, Neslen, Farrer, and Tuscher Formations, and the Castlegate and Sego Sandstones (for example, see Fouch and others, 1992) (figures 7, 8).
The Blackhawk and Neslen Formations contain most of the Mesaverde coal in the Uinta Basin.
In the Tabby Mountain and Vernal coal fields (figure 2), the term Mesaverde Formation is applied to coal-bearing units (for example, see Doelling and Graham, 1972) that we consider to be stratigraphically equivalent (in part) to the Blackhawk and Neslen Formations.
In the Piceance Basin, the Mesaverde Group includes the Mount Garfield, Hunter Canyon, Iles, and Williams Fork Formations; locally, the term Mesaverde Formation is applied to strata considered to be equivalent (in part) to the Iles and Williams Fork Formations (plates 1, 2).
The Mount Garfield, Mesaverde, and Williams Fork Formations contain coal deposits that are thought to be the source for most of the gas found in the Mesaverde TPS in the Piceance Basin.
For ease of discussion, we include all major coal-bearing strata in the lower part of the Mesaverde Group in the Williams Fork Formation, and use this terminology in lieu of Mount Garfield and Mesaverde Formation nomenclature in the Piceance Basin (for example, see Johnson, 1989).
Throughout much of the Uinta and Piceance Basins, the lacustrine shales form a potential seal that may inhibit further vertical migration of gas from Mesaverde Group source rocks.
Gas produced from reservoirs within the Green River Formation is largely derived from lacustrine source rocks within that formation (Johnson and Rice, 1990; Rice and others, 1992).
The base of these lacustrine shales is used as the boundary between the Mesaverde TPS and the overlying Green River TPS.
Separation of the Mesaverde TPS from the underlying Mancos/Mowry TPS (figure 1) is problematic.
In many areas, there does not appear to be an effective seal separating the two systems, and gas occurring in reservoirs in the lower part of the Mesaverde Group may have migrated from source rocks in the underlying Mancos Shale.
For this reason, that part of the Mesaverde Group below the lowest major coal zone is included in the underlying Mancos/Mowry TPS.
Units in the Mesaverde Group assigned to the Mancos/Mowry TPS based on these criteria include marginal-marine sandstones in the Star Point Sandstone and in the lower part of the Blackhawk Formation, the Castlegate (part) and Sego Sandstones, and the Corcoran, Cozzette, Rollins, and Trout Creek Sandstone Members of the Iles Formation (for example, see Johnson, 1989).
We believe that the gas within these units migrated primarily from source rocks in the underlying Mancos/Mowry TPS.
Johnson and Rice (1990), for example, noted that gas produced in reservoirs below the lowest major coal zone in the Mesaverde Group in the Piceance Basin, and gases produced from reservoirs in the underlying Mancos Shale, tend to be chemically wet and are commonly associated with minor amounts of oil.
Their study indicates that the gas was generated by source rocks composed of a mixture of Type II and Type III organic matter typical of the marine Mancos Shale.
In addition, the “blanket-like” geometry that characterizes some of the marginal-marine sandstones below the lowest major coal zone in the Mesaverde Group throughout much of the Piceance Basin and part of the Uinta Basin may have provided a conduit for up-dip migration and leakage of gas derived from the Mancos Shale.
An example is the Rollins and Trout Creek Sandstone Members of the Iles Formation, which underlie the lowest major coal zone in the Mesaverde Group throughout most of the Piceance Basin (Johnson, 1989).
Although the Rollins and Trout Creek gradually climb stratigraphically towards the southeast, in a regional sense they form a single, unbroken regressive sandstone unit throughout much of the basin (for example, see Hettinger, Chapter 12, this CD-ROM).
Unlike the more highly gas saturated, lenticular sandstones within the Mesaverde Group, the sandstone body formed by the Rollins and Trout Creek is unique in that it appears to be predominantly water saturated, even within basin-centered accumulations where little water should be present.
Paleogeographic reconstructions by Johnson and Nuccio (1986) and Johnson (1989) indicate that the Rollins and Trout Creek have been exposed on the margins of the Piceance Basin since Eocene time and thus could have acted as a conduit for gas migration and leakage from the deep basin to the surface since the time of peak gas generation in the Mancos Shale during late Paleocene and early Eocene time (Nuccio and Roberts, Chapter 4, this CD-ROM).
This conduit, in effect, may have inhibited the migration of gas from Mancos Shale source rocks in down-dip areas of the basin to potential reservoirs higher in the Mesaverde Group and in overlying formations.
The Castlegate Sandstone in the east-central and eastern Uinta Basin may be analogous (in part) to the Rollins– Trout Creek body in that this unit forms an extensive sandstone sheet that could also allow for leakage of gas derived from the underlying Mancos Shale.
However, limited drill-hole data, coupled with the fact that some gas is being currently produced from the Castlegate Sandstone, preclude determining if this unit is predominantly water saturated, as the Rollins and Trout Creek Sandstone Members seem to be.
Based on the foregoing, we define the stratigraphic base of the Mesaverde TPS as follows: (1) in the western part of the Uinta Basin, the base of the Mesaverde TPS is placed at the base of the lowest coal zone in the Blackhawk Formation or at the base of the Mesaverde Formation in the Tabby Mountain coal field; (2) in the central and eastern part of the Uinta Basin, the base of the Mesaverde TPS is placed at the base of the lowest coal zone in the Neslen Formation (top of Sego Sandstone) and at the base of the Mesaverde Formation in the Vernal coal field; and (3) in the Piceance Basin, the base of the Mesaverde TPS is placed at the base of the lowest coal zone in the Williams Fork Formation (top of Rollins and Trout Creek Sandstone Members).
