The events chart in figure 30 summarizes the essential elements of source rock, reservoir rock, seal rock, and overburden rock, and the processes of generation, migration, accumulation, and trap formation that are essential to form petroleum accumulations.
Source rocks include marine shales deposited from Early to Late Cretaceous time (≈105-80 Ma) and include the Lower Cretaceous Thermopolis Shale, and the Upper Cretaceous Mowry and Cody Shales, along with marine shales in the Frontier Formation.
Coal beds in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde and Meeteetse Formations and Paleocene Fort Union Formation (≈82-55 Ma) are also believed to be gas-source rocks.
Reservoir rocks range in age from Early Cretaceous to Paleocene (≈134-55 Ma) and include (1) fluvial sandstones and conglomerate in the Cloverly Formation, (2) fluvial and estuarine sandstones in the Muddy Sandstone, (3) sandstone and possibly fractured shale in the Mowry Shale, (4) marine sandstones in the Frontier Formation and upper part of the Cody Shale, (5) marginal marine and fluvial sandstones and coal beds in the Mesaverde and Meeteetse Formations, (6) nonmarine sandstones in the Lance Formation, and (7) non- marine sandstones and coal beds in the Fort Union Formation.
The Thermopolis, Mowry, Cody, Lewis, and Bearpaw Shales provide thick regional seals.
In addition, shales interbedded with sandstone reservoirs provide local seals.
Important structural traps formed during the Laramide orogeny where compressional tectonics formed numerous anticlines along the margins of the basin.
Permeability in tight basin-centered accumulations is thought to be enhanced by fractures that resulted from Laramide deformation.
Based on burial history and petroleum-generation modeling, the amount of overburden rock required to reach thermal maturation levels sufficient to generate hydrocarbons (gas) from the oldest source rocks-Mowry and Thermopolis Shales-accumulated by about 63 Ma in the deeper parts of the basin (figure 28).
Continued subsidence and deposition progressively buried the younger source rocks until they achieved levels of thermal maturity sufficient to generate hydrocarbons.
Locally in some of the deeper parts of the basin, generated oil reached thermal maturities sufficient to initiate thermal cracking of oil to gas.
Gas generated in the deeper parts of the basin migrated vertically, in some cases many thousands of feet into younger, less mature reservoirs.
Around 10 Ma the Rocky Mountain region, including the Bighorn Basin, was uplifted, initiating erosion and rapid basin excavation.
Subsequent cooling significantly reduced the rates of hydrocarbon generation.
However, computer modeling indicates that in some parts of the basin minor generation may continue to the present day.
