This hypothetical play is characterized by (1) probable hydrocarbon accumulations in footwall structural or truncation traps in reservoir rocks interbedded with source rocks, both of Cretaceous age, and (2) gas from Paleozoic shale sources, accumulating in Paleozoic and Mesozoic reservoirs in tightly folded anticlines in hanging wall traps in the Crawford Thrust Plate.
The play area lies mainly in Utah and Idaho and is bounded on the west by the Willard-Paris Thrust and on the east by the Crawford-Meade Thrusts.
The northwestern boundary is at the edge of the Snake River Plain, and the southern boundary is at a point where the thrust systems swing abruptly westward.
The play is approximately 180 mi long and from 8 to 30 mi wide.
Limited well and seismic data indicate that a moderately thick Cretaceous section is preserved under the leading edge of the Crawford Thrust Plate, where clastic reservoirs of marginal quality and thickness may be present.
These include sandstone units of the Frontier and Bear River Formations in which probable reservoir facies are fluvial, deltaic, and barrier bar sandstones.
Analogous, known low-productive reservoir facies east of the toe area of the Absaroka thrust are 10-50 ft thick and have porosities that range from 7 to 12 percent, but their permeability is low.
Fractured carbonates in the Triassic Dinwoody and Permian Phosphoria Formations are the productive reservoirs in the abandoned Hogback Ridge field.
Other potential reservoirs may exist in younger Triassic and Jurassic units and in older Paleozoic rocks.
Possible source rocks in the hanging wall of the Crawford Thrust include shale of Mississippian, Permian, and Triassic age.
Triassic shales are of limited areal extent and appear to be low in organic carbon, and the Permian Phosphoria is very mature to postmature, based on thermal-maturity data.
It is probable, however, that scattered dry gas shows in the play area and the dry gas produced at Hogback Ridge field are late-stage products of Phosphoria hydrocarbon generation, but Mississippian shales may also have been a very localized source of dry gas in this field.
Data from the few wells that penetrated the Crawford Plate in the southern half of the play delineate a narrow corridor of Cretaceous-age potential source rocks beneath the leading edge of the Crawford Plate.
Thermal maturation studies of this section indicate that it contains a mixture of kerogen types; however, it does include oil-prone Type II kerogen, and it is tentatively estimated that these oil-prone source rocks are presently at an oil-generative level of thermal maturation.
Gas chromatography studies of oil-stained samples in the Jurassic Twin Creek Limestone and Triassic Ankareh and Thaynes Formations from two wells in the hanging wall indicate that the hydrocarbons migrated into the hanging wall in Late Cretaceous time from these footwall Cretaceous source rocks.
Structural traps normally present along the leading edge of an anticlinal fold trend, typical of the toe area of most thrust sheets, are absent from the Crawford Plate owing to uplift and beveling of the leading edge of the thrust, resulting in the breaching and erosion of possible hanging wall traps.
Potential hanging wall traps may exist, however, in the form of low-relief folds above associated splay faults, or in tightly folded anticlines sealed by shale and anhydrite within intraplate imbricate thrusts.
Other footwall traps may be present that are related to folding within trailing edge imbricates off the Absaroka Thrust, or splays off the Crawford Thrust into the footwall.
Truncation traps, with asphaltic seals, at the updip edge of footwall beds may also be present.
Drilling depths are estimated to range from 10,000 to 17,500 ft to Mesozoic and Paleozoic targets.
Exploration status and resource potential: The play is considered to be hypothetical and in a young stage of exploration with only about 50 wildcat wells drilled.
The majority of shows reported are limited to dry gas, except for the few wells that had oil staining in Triassic rocks.
The only production found in the play was from the one-well Hogback Ridge field, located midway between the edges of the Crawford and Willard-Paris Thrusts.
The field was discovered in 1977 and abandoned in 1981 after producing 5.8 BCF of dry gas from fractured carbonates of Permian and Triassic age.
A few wells drilled in the northwestern one-third of the play had recorded elevated bottom-hole temperatures, indicating that higher geothermal gradients exist here in proximity to volcanics of the Snake River Plain of Idaho.
This type of setting could be a deterrent to exploration.
Any significant potential in the play, particularly for gas, would remain in the footwall Cretaceous section of the Crawford Thrust Plate in the southern half of the play.
