The Mesaverde-Meeteetse Formation Coalbed Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50340281) is a hypothetical AU that is believed to have the potential to produce gas from coal beds in the Mesaverde and Meeteetse Formations (Judith River Formation and Eagle Sandstone in Montana).
These formations were assessed jointly because of general continuity of the coal-bearing section extending from the Mesaverde Formation upward into the Meeteetse Formation.
The AU encompasses approximately 2,500 mi2 around the periphery of the Bighorn Basin (figure 42).
The upper limit is defined as the base of the Mesaverde Formation outcrop or equivalent rocks, and the lower limit is defined as the area where coal beds are interpreted to be present at depths of 6,000 ft or less (figure 40).
Coal beds at greater depths were not considered due to the potential decrease in permeability with increasing depth (Rice and others, 1996).
Estimates of the total in-place coal resources in Upper Cretaceous and Tertiary strata of the Bighorn Basin are on the order of 1.8 billion short tons (R.W. Jones, written commun., as reported in Love, 1988).
Coal mining in the basin began in the late 1800s, and more than 12,000,000 tons were produced from Cretaceous coal deposits in the Wyoming part of the basin.
About 90 percent of the total came from some thirteen mines producing coal in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde Formation near Gebo (Glass and others, 1975); currently there are no mines.
Upper Cretaceous coal beds are concentrated in the lower and middle parts of the Mesaverde Formation and in the upper part of the Meeteetse Formation (Johnson, 1998).
Individual coal beds are as thick as 12 ft, but typically range from 4 to 6 ft or less (Glass and others, 1975; Johnson, 1998).
In the subsurface, the maximum, combined coal thickness for both formations is 38 ft, with the thicker coal accumulations primarily in the southern part of the basin.
The apparent rank of coal beds in the Mesaverde Formation ranges from high volatile C bituminous to subbituminous A or B; the bituminous coal is restricted to one coalfield (Silvertip field) near the Wyoming-Montana state line (figure 20).
Meeteetse coals are subbituminous in rank (Glass and others, 1975).
Reported thermal maturity (R0) values for coal in the Mesaverde Formation range from a low of 0.27 percent in outcrops in the western part of the basin to more than 1.10 percent in the deep basin adjacent to the Oregon Basin thrust fault; Meeteetse coal thermal maturities range from 0.35 percent in outcrops to more than 0.90 percent in the deep basin (Nuccio and Finn, 1998; Finn and Pawlewicz, 2007).
Test wells for coalbed gas in the Mesaverde Formation have been drilled in Wyoming, adjacent to the Wyoming-Montana state line, and at one location in the southwestern part of the basin near Grass Creek (WOGCC, 2007).
However, there have been no published results from this drilling and the AU is essentially 100 percent untested.
The AU is classed as hypothetical because there is currently no production of coal-bed gas from the Mesaverde, Meeteetse, or equivalent strata in the basin (WOGCC, 2007), so analogs from the Powder River Basin and Piceance Basin (in Colorado) (Flores, 2004; Johnson and Roberts, 2003) were used in this assessment on the basis that they produce coal of similar rank (primarily subbituminous).
Input data for the assessment of AU 50340281 is shown on the FORSPAN ASSESSMENT MODEL FORM in Appendix E.
The minimum and maximum areas for the AU are 1,457,000, and 1,781,000 acres, respectively, with a calculated mean of 1,619,000 acres.
The reason for the wide range in acreages is because drill data are lacking for determining the depth to or even the presence of coal beds in the lower part of the Mesaverde Formation in many areas.
The minimum and maximum percentages of the untested AU area that has potential for additions to reserves are 0.5 and 14 percent, respectively, with a calculated mean of 5.7 percent and a mode of 2.5 percent (see Appendix E).
The minimum area restricts coalbed gas potential to areas in the southern part of the basin where total coal thicknesses exceed 30 ft.
The mode area includes the minimum area, coupled with areas where the total coal thickness exceeds 20 ft and additional areas where coal beds coincide with subtle anticlinal folds at the top of the Mesaverde Formation.
The maximum area includes the minimum and mode areas plus all remaining areas where the total coal thickness exceeds 10 ft.
The estimated minimum, median, and maximum total recovery per cell for untested cells having potential for additions to reserves is 0.02, 0.1, and 1.2 BCFG, respectively, with a calculated mean of 0.14 BCFG (Appendix E).
These estimates are based primarily on comparisons to estimated ultimate recoveries (EURs) of coalbed gas from wells producing from subbituminous coal in the Powder River Basin in Wyoming (Anderson and Canyon coal beds).
A minimum EUR of 0.02 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG) was applied to untested cells in AU 50340281; this value is generally considered representative of the minimum gas recovery required for a successful well.
Median EURs for wells producing from the Anderson and Canyon coal beds in the Powder River Basin range from about 0.13 to 0.17 BCFG (Troy Cook, written commun., 2007).
However, a lower median EUR was applied to untested cells in this assessment unit because Mesaverde and Meeteetse coal beds in the Bighorn Basin are less continuous and significantly thinner than the Anderson and Canyon coal beds, which range from 20 to 30 ft in thickness.
The maximum recovery estimate is essentially equal to maximum EURs for the analog Powder River Basin coals (EUR range 1.2 to 1.3 BCFG).
The minimum and maximum area per cell of untested cells having the potential for additions to reserves is 40 and 240 acres, respectively with a calculated mean of about 127 acres and a mode of 100 acres.
Coalbed gas wells producing from coal in the Fort Union Formation (Tongue River Member) in the Powder River Basin, Wyoming, and from coal in the Mesaverde Formation in the Piceance Basin, Colorado, were used as analogs (Flores, 2004; Johnson and Roberts, 2003) for estimating cell size (drainage area) because of general similarities in coal rank (primarily subbituminous coal).
A 40-acre cell size was used at the minimum because of the potential for interference between wells producing at a closer spacing.
A 100-acre cell size (mode) is considered optimal in regard to gas volume and recovery, dewatering considerations, and reduction (or omission) of interference between adjacent wells.
The maximum of 240 acres considers the potential for increased drainage areas in exceptionally continuous and permeable coal reservoirs.
Estimated mode and maximum cell sizes used in this assessment are slightly larger than estimated cell sizes for untested cells in the Powder River Basin (Fort Union Formation; Flores, 2004) because the higher thermal maturities of Mesaverde and Meeteetse coal in the Bighorn Basin coals might enhance their permeability due to better cleat development.
Conversely, these values are slightly less than drainage-area estimates for coalbed gas wells in the Piceance Basin (Mesaverde Formation; Johnson and Roberts, 2003) where Upper Cretaceous coals are more mature, generally thicker, and more continuous than coal beds in the Bighorn Basin.
The mean estimate for undiscovered gas resources that have potential for additions to reserves in the Mesaverde-Meeteetse Formation Coalbed Gas Assessment Unit (50340281) is 98 BCFG; tabulated assessment results are summarized in table 1.
