Figure 1 includes the generalized distribution of assessment units for the Mesozoic-Cenozoic TPS (60410101 and 60410102).
Subsurface extent of potential reservoir formations is derived from sources that include Balkwill and others (1995), Mathalone and Montoya (1995), Pindell and Tabbutt (1995), and Petroconsultants (1996).
Intervals of reservoir and source rocks for all petroleum systems are shown on the stratigraphic column (figure 3).
Maximum extent of the Napo-Hollin assessment unit (60410101) is an approximation of the subsurface distribution of Cretaceous and Tertiary formations based on the references just named.
Minimum extent of this assessment unit (figure 1) incorporates both the 0.6 percent mean random vitrinite reflectance (Ro) contour, as the area of hydrocarbon source rocks that are thermally mature for oil generation (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995), and the areal limit of petroleum production across the province.
Some oil and gas potential exists east of this boundary, particularly along approximately east-west-trending fluvial systems of the Napo Formation.
However, water washing and biodegradation could adversely affect resources in the eastern part of the province; biodegradation of oil increases near the eastern and western margins of current production.
Probably the greatest potential for new fields within the Mesozoic-Cenozoic TPS is along the northwest-southeast trend of current oil and gas production, inasmuch as many relatively unexplored and inaccessible areas lie between the fields, and the focus of exploration has been on finding large fields associated with structural traps.
The boundary of the Basin-Center Gas hypothetical assessment unit (60410102) was determined using the 1.0 percent Ro contour for Lower Cretaceous source rocks (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
This is the inferred lower limit for the generation and migration of thermogenic gas from the types II and III source rocks that are present within this petroleum system.
Greatest potential for gas production from the hypothetical Basin-Center Gas assessment unit is centered within this portion of the southwestern Oriente and northwestern Maranon Basins.
The most favorable reservoir facies would be low-permeability nearshore marine sandstones of the Napo, Chonta, and Agua Caliente Formations.
Some potential exists within shoreface, deltaic, and fluvial sandstones where faulting, erosional truncation, or diagenetic cementation isolates these facies.
This has the effect of slowing migration of gas out of the generative basin.
Maximum and minimum extents of the Napo-Hollin assessment unit (60410101) (figure 1) are also used to delineate the hypothetical Paleozoic TPS (604102).
The subsurface distribution of Paleozoic rocks across the basin is highly variable because of complex faulting and folding and erosion prior to deposition of Mesozoic rocks, as is indicated in figure 2.
Greatest potential for hydrocarbon production from Paleozoic rocks is in sandstones of the Permian Ene Formation in the Maranon Basin.
As discussed in the section on source rocks, several fields in this area produce oil from Cretaceous reservoirs that is typed as being generated by Ene Formation source rocks.
Information is currently insuficient to determine whether the Ene Formation in this basin has suitable reservoirs, as it does in the Ucayali Basin to the south.
Oil and gas in the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province are produced primarily from Cretaceous sandstones of shallow marine origin.
The depositional environments include deltaic, shelf, shoreline, and transitional marine-nonmarine settings.
Petroconsultants (1996) reported depositional environments for about 360 reservoir intervals in the province.
Of these, about 25 percent are from terrestrial, mostly fluvial environments; the remainder is from shallow marine, nearshore marine, and deltaic environments.
Thirty-seven of the 172 fields listed by Petroconsultants (1996) produce from fluvial depositional environments.
Reservoir facies across the province are predominately sandstone, including glauconitic, argillaceous, carbonaceous, and quartzose sandstones, with several fields producing from Napo A, B, and M2 limestones (Petroconsultants, 1996).
The primary reservoir rocks in the Putumayo Basin are the Lower Cretaceous (Aptian and Albian) Caballos Formation, and the unconformably overlying Lower and Upper Cretaceous (Albian to Campanian) Villeta Formation (Ramon, 1996).
Oil is also produced from the Eocene Pepino Formation.
The Caballos Formation in the Putumayo Basin is primarily characterized by braided stream to deltaic strata (Ramon, 1996).
Fourteen fields produce oil from the Caballos Formation.
The unconformably overlying Villeta Formation is mainly shale, limestone, and sandstone deposited in shallow marine settings within a shallow shelf environment (Ramon, 1996).
Twenty-six fields produce oil from the Villeta “U,” “T,” and “N” sandstones (Petroconsultants, 1996).
Most of these fields record commingled oil production from both formations.
The Vivian Formation in the northeastern Maranon Basin is productive in 26 fields.
The formation exhibits variable depositional environments across the region and is mostly fluvial.
Its counterpart in the Oriente Basin of Ecuador is the Napo M-1 sandstone (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
The axis of the Oriente Basin in Ecuador plunges from north to south toward a depocenter in northernmost Peru that contains in excess of 5,000 m (16,000 ft) of Cretaceous and Tertiary sedimentary rocks (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990).
Oriente Basin production is mainly from the Napo U and T sandstones, and the underlying Hollin Formation.
About 25 fields produce oil from mostly fluvial sandstones of the Maastrichtian Tena Formation (Petroconsultants, 1996).
The Cretaceous Hollin-Napo interval is as much as 500 m (1,600 ft) thick and consists of continental and marine sandstones, shales, and carbonates.
The east-southeast-oriented Aguarico and Cononaco arches in the eastern basin (figure 1) both provided sources of sediments and localized the approximately east-west-trending fluvial systems of the Hollin and Napo Formations (White and others, 1995).
The lower Albian part of the Hollin Formation consists largely of stacked crossbedded sandstone, and thinner intervals of interbedded mudstone and sandstone.
The upper part of this braidplain sequence forms the main oil reservoirs in the western Oriente Basin (White and others, 1995).
Primary depositional environments of Hollin Formation reservoirs are fluvial, shoreline, and shallow marine (Petroconsultants, 1996).
Shoreline position for Cretaceous sediments is toward the western margin of the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province.
Both the Hollin and Napo Formations comprise successions of eastward-sourced fluvial and deltaic sedimentary deposits that prograded westward into shoreline and marine shelf para-sequences.
East to west thinning of these reservoir units contributes to the possible formation of stratigraphic traps.
These are informally named the Napo T, U, and M1 sandstones and the M2 limestone (figure 3).
Sandstones are separated by shales and limestone beds (Balkwill and others, 1995).
Thickness of the Hollin Formation ranges from zero along the eastern Oriente Basin margin to nearly 200 m (650 ft) near the western boundary of the basin (White and others, 1995).
The Hollin reservoirs are dominantly alluvial plain sandstones that occupy much of the Oriente Basin.
Facies in the uppermost part of the Hollin in the western Oriente grade vertically into open marine strata with isolated tidal- and storm-influenced sandstone beds.
Depositional environments of more than 160 entries in the Petroconsultants database (1996) list Napo reservoir facies as deltaic (8 percent), fluvial (24 percent), and nearshore and shallow marine (68 percent).
The Hollin Formation in the Villano field, Oriente Basin, produces from transgressive deposits within an anticlinal trap; estimated original oil in place (OOIP) is more than 650 MMBO (Jordan and others, 1997).
The informally named main Hollin is the primary reservoir.
Jordan and others (1997) indicated that gross sandstone thickness in the field is nearly 150 m (500 feet) and consists of .ne- to coarse-grained, crossbedded quartzarenite to subarkosic sandstones.
Excellent porosity (20 percent), permeability (greater than 1 darcy), and low water saturation of 5 percent results from an abundance of intergranular pores and a lack of clays.
Sandstones in the lower part of the main Hollin were deposited by braided streams that traversed incised valleys of the Chapiza Formation.
The upper part of the main Hollin was deposited in point bars of a sandy meandering river.
Estimated noneroded thicknesses of individual point bars are 15 to 20 m (50 to 65 feet).
The Triassic and Lower Jurassic Santiago Formation in Ecuador has been recognized only in the Santiago River area (in the Cutucu uplift of the Andean Foothill Belt (figure 1)), and possibly in the Sacha Profundo-1 well (Rivadeneira, 1986).
The Santiago Formation comprises transgressive marine, thinly bedded carbonates, and black bituminous shales that are overlain by a regressive sandstone-siltstone sequence.
Total formation thickness in the Oriente Basin may exceed 250 m (820 ft) (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990).
Uppermost Silurian and Lower Devonian strata are the oldest that have been drilled in the Oriente Basin; these deformed and mildly metamorphosed limestones, slates, and slaty shales and sandstones of the Pumbuiza Formation (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990) have no apparent reservoir or source rock potential.
This unit is overlain by as much as 750 m (2,500 ft) of thinly bedded carbonates and shales of the Macuma Formation; these strata, of Pennsylvanian to latest Permian in age, were deposited in a shallow marine carbonate shelf over an extensive area (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990).
Oil and gas production from the Maranon Basin is largely from sandstones of the Cretaceous Cushabatay, Agua Caliente, Chonta, and Vivian Formations.
Chonta Formation sandstones were deposited in shelf settings and are represented by strand plain and barrier island environments (Jarvis and Lay, 1993).
The Peruvian phase of the Andean orogeny ended marine deposition in the basin as indicated by deposition of the Upper Cretaceous Vivian Formation, which is only present in the Maranon Basin.
Isaacson and Diaz Martinez (1995) indicated that four phases characterize the Devonian to Permian sedimentation history of western Bolivia and adjacent regions, such as Peru.
These are: 
Shallow marine clastic deposition through the Devonian (Early to early Late Devonian (Lochkovian to Frasnian)), with an increase in sedimentation in late Early to early Middle Devonian (Emsian and Eifelian) time.
The primary source of sediments was from the west, based on lithofacies distribution and thicknesses.
Latest Devonian and Early Carboniferous (Famennian to Visean) sedimentation was marked by glaciomarine and fan-deltaic sedimentation.
Clasts were derived from underlying sedimentary units and andesitic, granitic, and tuffaceous rocks.
Mid-Carboniferous (Serpukhovian and Bashkirian) hiatus in sedimentation occurred, its age and duration varying across the region.
Siliciclastic and carbonate deposition occurred in Late Carboniferous and Early Permian time (Moscovian? to Artinskian).
The clastics were derived from a western source.
The clastics of the Permian Ene Formation are postulated to be the potential reservoir rocks.
