Coal and carbonaceous shale source rocks in the Mesaverde Group accumulated in mires, swamps, and marshes associated with deltaic and coastal plain environments in a generally west to east progradational depositional system; the primary coal-bearing intervals become increasingly younger and rise stratigraphically from west to east across the Uinta-Piceance Province (figures 7, 8; Hettinger and Kirschbaum, Chapter 12, this CD-ROM).
In the Piceance Basin, the most important coal-bearing interval is the Cameo-Fairfield coal group in the lower part of the Williams Fork Formation (Johnson, 1989); the Cameo-Fairfield coal group is present in the subsurface throughout most of the basin.
In the central and eastern parts of the Uinta Basin, coal and carbonaceous shale beds are present in the Neslen Formation (figure 10), a unit that for the most part is older than the Cameo-Fairfield coal group (Fisher and others, 1960).
The Neslen Formation extends into the deep subsurface of the Uinta Basin, and equivalent coal-bearing strata in the Mesaverde Formation crop out in the Vernal coal field (figure 2) north of the Uinta Basin boundary fault (figure 4).
Thickness of the Neslen ranges from 250 to 500 ft in southern and eastern-central areas of the basin (Fisher and others, 1960; Fouch and Cashion, 1979; Hettinger and Kirschbaum, Chapter 12, this CD-ROM).
West of the Green River, the formation grades laterally into fluvial units of the Castlegate Sandstone (Fouch and others, 1992; figures 7, 8).
Coal zones within the Neslen Formation in the south-central and southeastern Uinta Basin include (in ascending order) the Palisade (Utah designation), Ballard, Chesterfield, and Cameo-Carbonera coal zones.
The Palisade coal zone is equivalent (in part) to the Anchor coal zone in the Piceance Basin, and the Cameo-Carbonera coal zone is equivalent (in part) to the Cameo-Wheeler coal zone (Hettinger and Kirschbaum, Chapter 12, this CD-ROM).
Coal beds in the Neslen Formation decrease in abundance and thin toward the west, and only carbonaceous shale and minor coal occurs in the formation about 15 mi east of the Green River (for example, see Hettinger and Kirschbaum, Chapter 12, this CD-ROM).
Total net coal thickness in the formation in the south-central and southeastern parts of the Uinta Basin ranges from 0 to as much as 29 ft near the Utah-Colorado border (D.
Tabet, Utah Geological Survey, written commun., 1999).
Thermal maturities based on vitrinite reflectance (Ro) values in the coaly intervals in the Mesaverde Group range from an Ro of 0.60 percent or less in outcrops around the margins of the two basins to Ro values exceeding 1.35 percent in deeper basinal areas (figure 12).
Maximum Ro values are about 2.1 percent in the deep trough of the Piceance Basin, and about 1.8 percent along the deep trough of the Uinta Basin.
The onset of thermogenic gas generation occurs at an Ro of about 0.73–0.75 percent (for example, see Johnson, 1989); coal-bearing zones in the basal part of the Mesaverde Group have exceeded this level of thermal maturity throughout much of the Uinta and Piceance Basins (figure 13).
In the Uinta Basin, the onset of thermogenic gas generation in the coaly intervals began about 42 million years ago (Ma) in the deep-basin trough, with peak gas generation occurring between 26 and 17 Ma (figure 14).
Coal in the Emery Sandstone Member of the Mancos Shale in the Wasatch Plateau may have begun to generate gas as early as 68 Ma (figure 17).
In the Piceance Basin, the onset of gas generation along the deep-basin trough may have begun as early as 55 Ma, with peak generation occurring between 47 and 39 Ma (figure 15).
The difference in timing for gas generation in the two basins is related to their respective thermal and burial histories.
Cooling, as a result of down-cutting during the last 10 Ma, has greatly reduced the rate of gas generation in both basins, but some gas generation may still be occurring where presentday subsurface temperatures in Mesaverde Group coal-bearing intervals exceed about 200oF (Law, 1984; Spencer, 1987).
Coal has a substantial capacity to store gas in micropores and cleats, and as adsorbed gas within its molecular structure.
Thus, much of the gas generated during the early stages of thermogenic gas generation remains within the coal beds.
Johnson and Rice (1990) found that coalbed gases in the Piceance Basin were distinctly different from gases in adjacent sandstone reservoirs.
They suggested that sandstones in the basin-centered accumulation might contain gas generated from dispersed Type III organic matter in carbonaceous shales as well as gas generated from coals.
Gas expelled from coals and carbonaceous shales in the Uinta and Piceance Basins migrated into nearby, low-permeability sandstone beds in the Mesaverde Group, initiating the development of basin-centered gas accumulations in both basins.
Migration from the source rocks into sandstone beds probably occurred along fractures that formed as pressures increased and eventually exceeded fracture gradients during active gas generation.
These accumulations probably began to form during peak gas generation, which occurred about 26 Ma in the Uinta Basin (figure 14) and 47 Ma in the Piceance Basin (figure 15).
As nearby sandstone reservoir rocks became largely gas saturated, gas derived from coal and carbonaceous shale in the lower part of the Mesaverde Group began to migrate vertically, expanding the basin-centered accumulations into the overlying less organically rich part of the Mesaverde Group as well as into overlying lower Tertiary rocks at places such as the Greater Natural Buttes (GNB) field in the Uinta Basin.
Some Mesaverde gas also escaped vertically into shallow, conventional-type sandstone reservoirs in both basins (Johnson and Rice, 1990; Rice and others, 1992; Johnson and others, 1994).
The vertical migration of gas from Mesaverde Group source rocks through faults and major fractures may best be evidenced in the GNB field, which coincides in large part with a major fault-fracture trend (figures 5, 6).
Many of the fractures are filled with gilsonite, a solid hydrocarbon derived from oil shale in the Green River Formation.
At GNB field in the Uinta Basin, isotopically similar gases are produced from sandstone reservoirs throughout the entire Mesaverde TPS at depths ranging from 4,210 to 9,332 ft (Rice and others, 1992).
The top of the Cameo-Fairfield coal group, which is the most likely source for this gas, occurs at depths of from 5,500 to 8,500 ft in this area.
At the Piceance Creek Dome field in the central part of the Piceance Basin (figure 3), gas from a sandstone reservoir in the lowermost part of the Eocene Green River Formation (depths from 2,300 to 2,700 ft) also appears to be derived largely from Mesaverde Group coal and carbonaceous shale.
There, the Cameo-Fairfield coal group occurs at depths ranging from 8,000 to 12,000 ft.
Isotopic evidence also supports the concept that vertical migration of gases was more important than lateral migration.
Gases are isotopically distinctive in each of the three different areas of the Piceance Basin mentioned above.
The differences are related primarily to variations in thermal maturity in the underlying Cameo-Fairfield group, the likely source for gas in all three areas.
Long-term lateral migration would tend to eliminate the distinctiveness of the gases in the three areas and eliminate the close correlation between isotopic compositions and thermal maturities in the underlying source rocks.
Furthermore, lateral migration would likely be inhibited by the lenticular nature of the predominantly fluvial sandstone reservoirs in the Mesaverde TPS.
