This hypothetical play is an eastward and southward extension (figure 9) of the productive Sunniland trend in the Upper Sunniland Tidal Shoal Oil play (5001).
Thus, reservoir and source rocks are the same as those of play 5001.
This play forms a southwest-to-northeast-oriented arcuate trend approximately 20 mi wide and 250 mi long that extends from the State waters of the Dry Tortugas northeast, through the Florida Keys and along the southeastern Atlantic Coast of the Florida Peninsula to Broward County.
Bioclastic mounds smaller than those found in currently productive units of the upper part of the Sunniland Formation accumulated on subtle structural highs in this updip, less thermally mature area of the basin to the east and far south.
Prominent positive structural elements include the Pine Key arch and the Largo high.
Some low API gravity (10°–14°) heavy-oil shows have been reported in wells in the northern portion of the play area; however, 22° API gravity oil was reported in shows from wells near the Marquesas Keys in the west and southernmost part of the play area (Faulkner and Applegate, 1986; Lloyd, 1992).
The Extended Upper Sunniland Tidal Shoal Oil play (5005) is delineated by an area that may contain porous tidal-shoal facies that formed on topographic/bathymetric highs.
The dark carbonate source unit in the lower part of the Sunniland Formation thins toward the eastern and southern margins of the basin south of the play, making it less favorable than the proven Upper Sunniland Tidal Shoal Oil play (5001).
The Sunniland Formation rocks in this area are also less thermally mature than in play 5001.
The eastern and southern Atlantic coastal boundaries of the play are delineated by the Florida State waters 3-mi boundary, and the northern, Gulf of Mexico boundary is delineated by the 10.36 mi Florida State waters boundary.
Total mean volume of undiscovered oil in the Extended Upper Sunniland Tidal Shoal Oil play was estimated at about 27.3 MMBO with an additional 14.6 BCF of associated gas.
The median number of new discoveries is six accumulations having a median field size of 4 MMBO (table 1).
In the hypothetical Wood River Dolomite Deep Gas play (figure 2 and figure 10), the Upper Jurassic(?) and Lower Cretaceous Wood River Formation averages about 1,700 ft thick and stratigraphically is the lowest sedimentary unit in the South Florida Basin.
The few wells that have penetrated this formation show that a 100- to 150-ft-thick clastic unit forms the basal part of the Wood River Formation and consists of dark-red shale and fine-to coarse-grained arkosic sandstone and calcareous sandstone (Applegate and others, 1981).
These basal clastic units may represent fan, fan-delta, and fluvial-lacustrine or marine deposits.
Below the basal clastic sequence in Collier County is a rhyolite porphyry with an age of 189 Ma.
Overlying these clastic rocks is a thick sequence of anhydrite, dolomite, and limestone with occasional interbedded salt stringers, indicating marine transgression (Applegate and others, 1981).
The Mobil-Phillips Seminole “C” well near Seminole field (figure 10) in Hendry County produced measurable gas and water flows at depths of about 15,700 ft from perforations in a dolomite zone averaging about 8 percent porosity.
Moreover, logs from the well indicated higher porosities and increased resistivities just above the perforated section, possibly indicating the presence of gas (Applegate and others, 1981; Palacas and others, 1981).
Although formation damage occurred in the well bore, this well had potential for commercial gas production (JG Palacas, oral commun, 1994); the occurrence of a potentially commercial well indicates a possible source of deep gas.
Marine beds, generally regarded as potential petroleum sources, are predominant in the formation, and the depositional environment, especially in the southern part of the play area, probably favored reef growth; thus a source, a seal, and a reservoir should be present.
Organic geochemistry studies of well samples from the Wood River Formation indicate that the hydrocarbon-generating potential of the unit ranges from poor to excellent (Palacas and others, 1981; Faulkner and Applegate, 1986).
The scarcity of wells penetrating the Wood River Formation, however, limits and evaluation of each of the geologic and petroleum system components of the play and, therefore, the play is considered hypothetical and was risked heavily.
The rocks of potential reservoirs in the Wood River are porous (8 percent or greater) dolomite units enclosed by anhydrite, salt stringers, and (or) micritic limestone at depths of about 15,000–19,000 ft onshore and in State waters.
The play area includes areas of the southern part of basin where reef growth is favored (figure 10).
It is possible that gas in the Wood River Formation in the area of the Sunniland trend may have originated in deeper parts of the basin and migrated updip, perhaps as a single large accumulation.
The Wood River Dolomite Gas play was risked for charge, reservoir, and trapage The combined risk probability of the play was 0.1, which categorized the play as high risk and was not assessed in the 1995 USGS Assessment.
The 1995 USGS National Oil and Gas Assessment defined six conventional plays in the Florida Peninsula Province (USGS Province 50), all within the South Florida Basin.
Five of these plays were assessed, all which were oil plays of Cretaceous age.
The sixth was a deep gas play in dolomite of the Upper Jurassic(?) and Lower Cretaceous Wood River Formation and was highly risked, thus not assessed.
A mean total undiscovered resource of 370.1 MMBO and 57.5 BCFG (about 6 MMBOE) was estimated from the five oil plays of the South Florida Basin.
The upper Sunniland Formation along the main “fairway” where eight fields of >1 MMBO have been discovered was estimated to contain the most (254 MMBO or about 70 percent) of the total estimated mean undiscovered oil in the South Florida Basin.
The less mature, Dollar Bay Shoal-Reef play ranked second with a total estimated 66 MMBO.
The future of Florida’s moderate potential for undiscovered resources may be limited by environmental and political controls that discourage oil and gas exploration and development within the South Florida Basin.
