The area of the hypothetical play includes the northern extensions of three of the major thrust systems, Crawford-Meade, Absaroka, and Prospect-Darby.
It is characterized by a range of possible trapping conditions but involves mainly Paleozoic reservoir rocks in hanging wall anticlines juxtaposed against Cretaceous source rocks in the footwall of the thrust systems.
The play trends mainly northwest-southeast for a distance of about 105 mi and varies in width from 35 to 55 mi.
It is bounded on the west by the Meade Thrust, on the east by the Prospect Thrust, on the northwest by the Snake River Plain and on the south by an east-west projection of the easterly change in strike of the Darby Thrust.
Potential reservoir rocks are of primarily Ordovician (Bighorn Dolomite), Mississippian (Madison Group), and Pennsylvanian (Wells Formation) age.
The best porosity development occurs in the Madison, based on drill-stem test data from the scattered wells that have drilled into dolomitized zones in this 1,400 ft thick unit.
The 1,000 ft thick Wells Formation (“Weber Sandstone” of industry usage) is characterized by erratic porosity development, and is relatively tight overall, although fairly strong hydrocarbon shows have been identified in some wells.
The Bighorn is 400-500 ft thick and contains zones of intercrystalline and vuggy porosity.
The only source rocks of significance are organic-rich shales in Cretaceous and Permian rocks.
Shale beds in the Bear River Formation and Aspen Shale are the richest, and marine shale in the Frontier and Hilliard Formations also contains sufficient organic carbon to be considered potential source rock.
The organic-rich shale in the Phosphoria Formation is believed to be in an advanced stage of thermal maturity throughout the play and well into the dry gas stage.
Minimal well data available indicate that humic material is common in the organic matter of Cretaceous shale, so that these rocks are slightly more gas prone.
Shows of dry gas have been reported in wells in the northwestern area of the play, near the Idaho-Wyoming border, in subthrust Cretaceous rocks.
In this same general locality, bleeding oil was reported in fractured Cambrian (Gallatin-equivalent) dolomite beds in one wildcat well.
A well that drilled under a blind thrust into Cretaceous shale beneath the Prospect Thrust in the northeastern part of the play flowed subcommercial oil and gas from a thick, porous dolomite zone in the Madison.
Probable source of these trapped hydrocarbons is thought to be shale in the Cretaceous Frontier and Hilliard Formations in the footwall of the blind thrust.
Traps may occur as tightly folded anticlines associated with duplex fault zones, or as “pop-up” block structures (triangle zones) formed in areas of backthrusting, and as broad, faulted anticlinal structures in hanging walls where reservoir beds toe down to blind thrust zones in contact with Cretaceous source rocks in the footwall.
Paleozoic rocks contain adequate seals, especially shale in the Devonian Darby Formation and anhydrite beds in the upper part of the Madison.
Drilling depths are estimated to range from 4,500 to 15,000 ft.
Exploration status and resource potential: The play is hypothetical because of the extremely low density of drilling (about 60 total wildcats) within the broad area of the play.
Although no fields have been discovered and no hydrocarbons produced, the Chevron, USA Cabin Creek wildcat well tested up to 100 BOPD and about 800 MCFGPD from a 200 ft porous dolomite zone in the Madison beneath the Prospect Thrust, and was completed as a noncommercial oil and gas discovery in 1986.
No additional confirmation wells were drilled within this prospective area.
Future potential for undiscovered oil is fair to good and for gas is excellent.
Additional exploration in the play may be hampered by limited access to some public lands and by extremes of topography.
