Reservoir properties of many Travis Peak sandstones are significantly better than those characteristic of basin-centered gas reservoirs in which inherent, ubiquitous, low permeability provides an internal seal for thermally generated gas.
Travis Peak sandstones have received tight-gas designation across parts of east Texas and northern Louisiana.
At depths of less than 7,500 ft in east Texas, however, sandstones often exhibit permeabilities well above the 0.1-mD cutoff for qualification as a tight-gas reservoir.
At depths of less than 6,000 ft, permeability can exceed 100 mD.
At depths below 8,000 ft, where matrix permeability generally is less than 0.1 mD as a result of extensive quartz cementation, natural fractures are common, imparting fracture permeability to the reservoir.
In northern Louisiana where interdeltaic sandstones are separated by shale intervals, hydrocarbon production comes from sandstones throughout the Travis Peak.
In east Texas, most production of oil and gas from the Travis Peak comes from sandstone reservoirs in the upper 300 ft of the formation.
This production pattern seems to reflect a concentration of hydrocarbons in the upper Travis Peak, though in some fields, sandstones throughout the Travis Peak Formation are reportedly gas-charged.
Concentration of oil and gas probably occurs in upper Travis Peak sandstones because these meandering fluvial-channel, tidal-channel, and tidal-flat sandstones are encased in thick shales that provide effective seals.
Because of their inherent multistory, multilateral sand-body geometries and abundant vertical fractures, underlying low-sinuosity fluvial sandstones—which constitute the bulk of the Travis Peak Formation — form a highly interconnected network.
Thus, the thick fluvial sequence with its lack of thick, widespread shale barriers seems to provide an effective upward-migration pathway for gas rather than affording the inherent sealing capabilities typical of reservoirs harboring basin-centered gas accumulations.
On the basis of this analysis of reservoir properties of discovered accumulations including reservoir pressures, gas-water contacts, permeability, and traps and seals, we think that undiscovered accumulations in Travis Peak reservoirs will be conventional rather than continuous basin-centered.
Schmoker (1996) provided a detailed discussion of the characteristics of basin-centered gas accumulations.
According to IHS Energy Group data (PI/Dwights PLUS on CD-ROM), more than 10,000 wells are identified as producing from Travis Peak reservoirs in the East Texas and northern Louisiana Salt Basins as of April 2003 (plate 5).
Significant exploration drilling began in the late 1930s when more than 100 wells were completed each year.
Exploration efforts rose through the mid 1980s when annual completions totaled about 375 wells, and peak drilling occurred in the mid 1990s when more than 400 wells were completed each year.
According to the IHS Energy Group (2001) production data file, 151 reservoirs in 114 fields are reported as producing from the Travis Peak and Hosston Formations for those fields having more than 15 producing wells.
These 151 reservoirs report total cumulative production of 9.9 trillion cubic feet of gas (TCFG), 179 million barrels of oil (MMBO), and 667 million barrels of water (MMBW) (pls 6, 7).
These reservoirs are primarily gas producing and have a mean size (cumulative production plus proved reserves) of 65.6 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG).
Out of 151 reservoirs, 108 are classed as gas producing; these have an average gas-oil ratio (GOR) of 750 thousand cubic feet per barrel (MCF/B).
The USGS criterion for a gas field or reservoir is 20 MCF/barrel.
Reported GORs range from 0 (which is unrealistic) to more than 26,000 MCF/ B for all Travis Peak and Hosston reservoirs.
