The Mowry Shale was defined by Darton (1904) for exposures in the northwestern part of the Powder River Basin, and the top of the unit was revised by Rubey (1931) to include the Clay Spur Bentonite Bed.
In the Bighorn Basin no definitive correlation can be made to the Clay Spur, but based on a comparison with well logs in the northern Wind River Basin and the Casper arch area, we placed the Mowry-Frontier contact at a distinctive high-gamma geophysical log response (Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM; and Johnson, Chapter 7, this CD-ROM), which is stratigraphically lower than the contact of Goodell (1962) or of Van Houten (1962).
According to Keefer and others (1998), the Mowry Shale in the Bighorn Basin consists of two distinct units.
The lower unit consists of about 160 to 400 ft of soft fissile clay-rich shale similar to the Thermopolis Shale and is referred to as the upper Thermopolis Shale by several authors including Mills (1956) and Haun and Barlow (1962), and as the Shell Creek Shale by Eicher (1962).
The upper unit consists of about 240 to 400 ft of hard brittle siliceous shale.
Numerous gray to tan bentonite beds are common throughout the Mowry, ranging in thickness from less than one inch to about 7 ft (Byers and Larson, 1979).
The siliceous shales are dark brown to black, organic-rich, and contain an abundance of fish scales (Burtner and Warner, 1984).
Locally, there are thin fine-grained sandstones in the middle to upper part of the siliceous part of the Mowry.
These units, referred to informally as the "Kimball"ù and "Octh Louie"ù sands, have produced oil from fields on the east side of the basin (Pierce, 1948; Mills, 1956; Cardinal and others, 1989).
Davis (1987) also described two sandstone bodies in the Mowry Shale along the east and northeast sides of the basin.
These sandstones are fine- to medium-grained, as much as 15 ft thick, and form elongate bodies that Davis (1987) believed were deposited during a fall in sea level.
The Mowry Shale is marine in origin with a combined thickness for the lower and upper parts ranging from about 400 ft in the southeastern part of the basin to more than 800 ft near the Beartooth Mountains (figure 9).
Paleontologic evidence and radiometric dating indicate that the upper siliceous part of the Mowry is largely early Cenomanian in age (Cobban and Kennedy, 1989; Obradovich and others, 1996); however, radiometric dates for bentonite beds in the basal Mowry (Shell Creek equivalent) indicate an Albian (Early Cretaceous) age (Obradovich and others, 1996).
The Frontier Formation consists of marine and minor marginal-marine shale, siltstone, and sandstone that are generally interpreted to be deltaic or shoreface in origin (Hunter, 1952; Van Houten, 1962; Goodell, 1962; Siemers, 1975; Merewether and others, 1975; Merewether and others, 1998).
Minor amounts of carbonaceous shale and coal are present in the northwestern part of the basin (Siemers, 1975; Merewether and others, 1975).
The Frontier is early Cenomanian to early Coniacian in age and contains at least one major unconformity in the upper part (Merewether and others, 1975).
The lower contact is placed at the top of the Mowry, and the upper contact is typically placed at the top of the uppermost sandstone below the Cody Shale.
A thin distinctive marker is present in the lower part of the overlying Cody Shale (figure 7), especially in the southeastern part of the basin, and it probably represents a carbonate or chalk zone equivalent to the Upper Cretaceous Niobrara Formation.
The main Frontier interval, as defined between the top of the Mowry and chalk marker, ranges in thickness from 450 ft in the western part of the basin to about 1,075 ft in the southeastern part of the basin (figure 10).
There are at least six main sandstone units within the Frontier, but not all are present at any one locality.
They are continuous locally for tens of miles but are subject to truncation due to erosion, mainly by marine-flooding surfaces.
The maximum thickness of individual sandstones range to as much as 130 ft (see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM; and Johnson, Chapter 7, this CD-ROM).
The Cody Shale in the Bighorn Basin consists of marine shale, sandstone, and siltstone deposited during a major marine transgressive-regressive cycle that extended from Coniacian to Campanian time (Kauffman, 1977).
The formation ranges in thickness from about 1,700 ft in the northern part of the basin to nearly 3,800 ft in the southeastern part (figure 11).
The lower and upper contacts are conformable and interfinger extensively with the underlying Frontier and overlying Mesaverde Formations (figure 6).
The Cody Shale consists of two main units, the lower main body and the upper Claggett Member (Keefer and others, 1998).
The main part interfingers with and extends from the top of the Frontier Formation to the base of the Mesaverde Fomation and is composed of marine shale with increasing amounts of interbedded sandstone in the upper 500-1,200 feet (figure 6) (see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM).
The upper sandy part is similar to, but somewhat less sandy than, the upper sandy member of the Cody Shale in the Wind River Basin (see Finn, 2007a, and Johnson, 2007, for descriptions and correlation of the Cody Shale in the Wind River Basin).
Many of the sandstones in the upper part of the Cody are blanket-like, can be traced over many miles, and appear to pinch out into marine shale in all directions (see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM; and Johnson, Chapter 7, this CD-ROM).
The uppermost several hundred feet of the sandy part of the Cody that directly underlies the Mesaverde Formation is commonly referred to in Montana as the Telegraph Creek Formation (figures 6, 7).
The Cody is poorly exposed, however, limited outcrop studies by Johnson and others (1998) of uppermost Cody Shale indicate that the sandstones are very fine to medium-grained, generally laterally persistent, and exhibit a variety of bedding features including hummocky cross-bedding, which indicates a near- shore marine origin.
According to Keefer and others (1998), the Claggett Member (known as the Claggett Shale in Montana) is a westward-thinning tongue of marine shale and fine-grained sandstone that is split from the main part of the Cody Shale by the lower member of the Mesaverde Formation (Eagle Sandstone in Montana) (figures 6, 7).
The Claggett Member extends across the eastern and central parts of the Bighorn Basin, and thickens eastward from zero to nearly 500 ft thick at its eastern limit, where it merges with the main part of the Cody Shale (figures 6, 12) (see Finn, Chapter 6, this CD-ROM).
