The play is characterized by probable oil accumulations resulting from pinchout of reservoir sandstone facies updip and eastward into shale source-rock facies of Cretaceous age on the west-dipping trailing edge of the Hogsback Thrust.
The play extends from the Wyoming-Utah line northward for 115 mi to a point west of the LaBarge complex.
The western boundary of the play is at the toe of the Absaroka Thrust, and the play extends 3-8 mi to the east on the western part of the hanging wall of the Hogsback Thrust.
Within this trend lies the axial trace of the narrow, sharply folded Lazeart Syncline, whose gently inclined eastern limb forms the trailing edge (hanging wall) of the Hogsback Thrust.
The western limb of the syncline is vertical, overturned in places as much as 35º past vertical, and truncated by the Absaroka Thrust.
Nearly the entire 15,000 ft Cretaceous section is present in the play, including the Adaville, Hilliard, and Frontier Formations, Aspen Shale and Bear River Formation.
Potential reservoirs are limited, however, to sandstone beds of fluvial, deltaic, barrier bar, and offshore bar origin within the 3,000 ft thick Frontier and 800 ft thick Bear River.
Reservoir sandstones interbedded with coals in the lower Frontier range from 10 to 40 ft thick and have porosities of 7 to 12 percent, but their permeability is generally low, averaging 0.1 mD or less.
Thin, fossiliferous brown sandstones of the Bear River are interbedded with black shale and thin stringers of impure coal.
Reservoir quality of the sandstones is fair to good, with porosity ranging up to 16 percent and permeability commonly exceeding 0.1 mD.
Reservoirs in both formations, or equivalent units, are productive in a number of fields on the Moxa Arch in the Green River Basin.
Within the total Cretaceous section deposited in the province, the thickness of dark shales containing organic carbon alone exceeds 5,000 ft.
TOC of shale in the Adaville and Hilliard is about 1 weight percent, but the most organic rich shale in the play, and the main oil source rock, is interbedded with sandstone in the Frontier and Bear River and intervening Aspen Shale.
Maximum TOC measured in these units is 2 weight percent, 9.3 weight percent, and 2.7 weight percent, respectively.
These interbedded shale beds contain mixed Type II and Type III kerogen which is at the stage of peak oil generation mainly in the vicinity of the trailing edge of the Hogsback Thrust hanging wall.
Produced oil from two recent Frontier discoveries is 40º API gravity, waxy, and has a pour-point of 70º F. Active oil seeps are present in outcrops of the Cretaceous section along and in front of the toe of the Absaroka Thrust in the southern part of the play, where a sizable number of older, shallow wells have produced small amounts of oil.
Generation and migration of oil occurred in Late Cretaceous to early Tertiary time from indigenous source to reservoirs in the Frontier and Bear River.
It has been suggested that the Cretaceous shale section is still generating hydrocarbons.
Stratigraphic trap potential exists where porous and permeable sandstone beds grade updip (east) and pinch out into tighter, nonpermeable sandstone or shale on the trailing edge of the Hogsback Thrust.
Top and bottom seals are source shale encompassing the reservoir sandstone.
Several fields on the Moxa Arch, productive from both Frontier and Bear River, are at least partly controlled by this same type of stratigraphic pinchout.
The projected depth range for future drilling is estimated to be from 4,000 to 17,000 ft.
Seismic data in the vicinity of the two recent discoveries show that they are located on uniform westward-dipping (±30º) beds on the Hogsback hanging wall with no indication of structural reversal or faults to account for hydrocarbon accumulations in the two discoveries, except by stratigraphic control.
The earliest exploration and drilling in the play were concentrated near oil seeps in the vicinity of the presentday Aspen field in 1884.
The first wells completed, however, were in the nearby Spring Valley field in 1900, followed by the discovery of the Sulphur Creek field in 1942.
Depth to production in the Aspen, Frontier, and Bear River in these field ranges from 100 to 2,000 ft, and oil gravity ranges from 22º to 48º API.
Two recent discoveries in 1984 and 1985, the Lazeart (87 BOPD) and Elkol (6 BOPD) fields (currently shut-in), were drilled to test the validity of a Frontier-Bear River stratigraphic play.
Without additional offset drilling, the size of these accumulations cannot be determined; however, some 20 separate sandstone zones with oil saturation were logged between 6,300 and 7,000 ft in the lower Frontier in the Lazeart discovery.
Cumulative production from all fields in the play to the end of 1992 was 276,909 BO and 30,525 MCFG.
Future potential for oil and associated gas is low to moderate, and field sizes are anticipated to be in the small to medium category.
The amount of oil-in-place in Cretaceous rocks in the play, based on present data, appears to be quite significant, but improvement in extraction practices will be necessary in order to realize commercially recoverable amounts of oil in undiscovered accumulations.
Advances in the technology of reservoir stimulation, possibly the use of inclined or horizontal drilling techniques, and different completion methods may be required to accomplish this.
