Depth to the top of the oil-generation window for these source rocks in the Maranon Basin and the Ucayali Basin to the south varies from 2,000 to 3,300 m (6,600 to 11,000 ft); variation is attributed partly to the pattern of connate water convection from the basin depocenter in the west (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
Almost all of the current production in the Putumayo-Oriente-Maranon province is from the zone of thermally mature source rocks, suggesting that migration is primarily vertical, with only limited lateral migration.
Ramon (1996) believed that oil migration in the Putumayo Basin has also primarily been stratigraphically updip, with only limited vertical migration through faults; each reservoir interval in a field is laterally drained and vertically compartmentalized.
This interpretation is based on differences in oil geochemistry, but such data are sparse because exploration is limited outside this area due to access problems, decrease in oil quality to the east (decrease in API gravity due to water washing and biodegradation), and the fact that large structural traps across the province are concentrated closer to the Andes Mountains.
The potential for eastward migration of hydrocarbons along fluvial systems of the Napo Formation may exist, but the previously mentioned factors would probably limit field size and oil quality, and primary traps may not be structural but rather stratigraphic or a combination of stratigraphic and structural.
Tectonic events that the mark the beginning of the Cretaceous, and again in late Miocene through Pliocene (Quechua III) time reflect changes in plate convergence and stress fields (Math-alone and Montoya, 1995).
Although indications are strong since Mesozoic time for movement of Triassic salt and for basin inversion, the main episode of folding and thrusting was late Miocene to Pliocene; this is supported by apatite fission track analysis (AFTA) and modern seismic data (Marksteiner and Ale-man, 1996).
A thick sedimentary wedge of the Upper Cretaceous Tena Formation east of the Napo and Cutucu uplifts (figure 1), which are located near the western and southwestern border of the Oriente Basin, documents Late Cretaceous and Paleocene deformation (Peruvian Andean Phase); AFTA data in the western Putumayo Basin, Napo uplift, and Cutucu uplift document a middle Eocene uplift (Incaic Phase) followed by a late Miocene and Pliocene renewal of uplift (Marksteiner and Aleman, 1996).
Previous depocenters were inverted and the Andean fold and thrust belt encroached to the east; this late Tertiary deformation created many of the structural traps and led to source rock maturation and associated hydrocarbon generation and migration (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
Across South America source rock units as old as Ordovician and as young as Neogene (Miocene and Pliocene) have become mature in the Neogene phase(s) of basin development (Pindell and Tabbutt, 1995).
Kairuz and others (2000) used geochemical modeling to assign Miocene time (5–10 Ma) as the onset of oil generation in the Putumayo Basin.
Mark­steiner and Aleman (1996) believed the main phase of hydrocarbon generation and migration was from Late Cretaceous to middle Eocene time.
Although several structures are present that show Mesozoic thinning against the Triassic salt, the major episodes of salt withdrawal took place during the Tertiary (Marksteiner and Aleman, 1996).
Dashwood and Abbotts (1990) indicated that much of the oil discovered in the Maranon and Oriente Basins was generated from the western margins of the basins, before the onset of Miocene deformation of the Eastern Cordillera.
Estimated onset of oil generation was 8 Ma for the base of the Napo Formation in the south-central Oriente Basin, based on a reconstruction of the burial history from data obtained in the Bobonaza-1 well (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990).
By extrapolation to the deepest part of the presentday basin, onset of oil generation was about 11–8 Ma; oil generation and migration did not begin until middle Miocene time (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990) (figure 6).
Water salinity and gas-oil-ratio data for Hollin and Napo “T,” “U,” and “M-1” (figure 3) reservoirs show that various processes have affected hydrocarbon migration into and distribution in reservoirs of the Oriente Basin (Dashwood and Abbotts, 1990), and probably also in.uenced hydrocarbon generation, migration, and trapping in the Putumayo and Maranon portions of the province.
The Andean event of regional thinskinned tec -tonism ranges in age from about Miocene through Pliocene time and includes the Quechua III and other events.
Dashwood and Abbotts (1990) listed these processes as: 
Pre-Miocene (early Andean) time involved lateral migration of oil from the west (perhaps as much as 300 km).
Pre-Miocene fresh water influx from the west caused water washing and biodegradation of trapped and migrating oils.
Some reservoirs currently have active water drive.
Fresh water influx during the late Andean resulted in water washing and biodegradation of oil in shallower reservoirs.
Late Andean basin subsidence in the southwest caused local remigration and late-stage generation of hydrocarbons.
Late Andean structural movement involved breaching of oil-bearing traps.
Increased structural and (or) stratigraphic relief on some traps helped preserve unaltered oils.
Perhaps because of factors 5 and 6 above, Sofer and others (1985) believed that two phases of oil migration occurred for the Vivian reservoirs (figure 3) of the northeastern Maranon Basin.
Mello and Trindade (1999) thought that the basins were subjected to a complex generation-migration history in which oils generated during the first major pulse (Eocene to middle Miocene time) subsequently underwent biodegradation, and then experienced increased burial, cessation of biodegradation, and a second pulse of generation and migration (late Miocene to Recent).
Most fields across the province record one degraded or a nondegraded oil phase, based on examination of gas chromatographic analysis (GC) of whole crude oils (GeoMark, 1997).
Some of the oils exhibit a gas chromatographic signature characteristic of a mixing of biodegraded and nonbiodegraded oils.
Following migration of oil into reservoirs, influx of fresh water in the northern and eastern fields caused oil biodegradation and salinity variation of reservoir waters; remigration of oil has also been documented for the South Huayari field (Jarvis and Lay, 1993).
One other exception is for the Jibaro field, which produces oil from the Cretaceous Vivian Formation in the Maranon Basin.
The GC of oil from one well in this field, at about 2,960 m depth (9,700 ft), shows two “humps” in which early migrated oils were heavily biodegraded, leaving mostly heavier carbon-chain hydrocarbons of C15 and greater (figure 12).
A later stage of migration is exhibited by nondegraded light-carbon-chain hydrocarbons of C1 and greater (GeoMark, 1997).
