The Browse Basin was generally a low energy, shallow and narrow marine- influenced continental seaway that was open to the north, northeast and sometimes to the Rowley sub-basin in the southwest and beyond.
The land mass named Argo Land, portions of the eastern Indonesian plate, other continental plates connected to the Scott Plateau, and the Ashmore Platform separated the basin from the Tethys Ocean (Bradshaw and others, 1994).
Formation of the Argo Abyssal Plain in Middle to Late Jurassic (Callovian-Oxfordian) time opened the area to the ocean as a thermally subsiding passive style margin.
The main reservoir at Skua Field is the Jurassic Plover Formation.
The Plover Formation is present as erosional remnants beneath the late Middle Jurassic (Callovian) unconformity in tilted fault blocks mainly in the Vulcan sub-basin.
These marine to deltaic clastics are absent on the Ashmore Platform and partially preserved on the Londonderry High (Pattillo and Nichols, 1990).
Coarse fan deltas of the Montara Formation fringe the sub-basin on the southeast and extend into the axis.
The Vulcan Formation consists of restricted marine mudstone and deepwater fans that were derived from the graben flanks.
Late Cretaceous rocks, deposited as deepwater fans, in the central basin (PESA 1996) are the reservoir rocks in Caswell-1.
This well tested oil from thin sandstone of Albian age surrounded by shale.
The main reservoir sequence in the Scott Reef field and at Brecknock-1 is described as Jurassic interbedded sandstones, shales and volcanics that were deposited in nearshore marine to fluviodeltaic environments.
Porosity ranges from 11-14%.
The Triassic gas bearing interval at Scott Reef is dolomite and dolomitic sandstones (Bint, 1988).
Lower Cretaceous (Hauterivian to Barremian) oil and gas bearing reservoirs in Gwydion-1 are described as clean quartz sandstones that were deposited in high energy upper shoreface conditions and retain porosities of 24-27% (Spry and Ward, 1997).
Other gas bearing strata in this well are glauconitic sandstones of Early Cretaceous (Barremian to Albian) age.
The Jurassic section drilled at Arquebus-1, next to Lombardina (Figure 2), is 827 m thick and has an interpreted hydrocarbon column of 105 m (Haston and Farrelly, 1993).
The Lower Jurassic section contains spilitic volcanics that are interpreted to have erupted along the basin margin fault into shallow marine environments where deposition of carbonates, sandstones, siltstones, claystones, and volcaniclastics occurred.
The Middle Jurassic strata contains shallow marine to non marine, massive quartzose sandstone with porosity of 14%, interbedded with siltstone, claystone and carbonate.
The Upper Jurassic is described by Haston and Farrelly (1993) as shallow water claystone to sandstone with porosity ranging from 6-12%.
Jurassic intraformational shale and claystone seals are described by Bradshaw and others (1994).
Local and regional seal rocks consisting of lower to upper Cretaceous (Valaginian-Cenomanian) claystones are reported to reach a thickness of 1.5 km on the highs of the Scott Reef area and thicker in the sub-basins (Stephenson and Cadman, 1994).
These claystones are a result of the post breakup establishment of a passive margin continental shelf and slope of generally low energy and low sediment accumulation rate (Spry and Ward, 1997).
The U.S.G.S. Browse Basin Province (3913) contains one TPS (391301) with one assessment unit (39130101) (Figure 1).
Exploration targets are numerous and are underexplored in the Browse Basin.
The entire basin is underlain by either Permian or Triassic/Jurassic tilted fault blocks.
Where primary porosity is preserved, reservoir quality is good, although quartz overgrowths occlude much of the porosity at some locations in the deeper sedimentary rocks.
Miller and Stuart (1992) describe possible deepwater fans of Early Cretaceous (Valanginian) age, that have been identified on seismic.
These fans occur in the southwestern portion of the Browse Basin and are similar to the reservoir rocks at Caswell-1.
Depositional onlaps of progressively younger sediments onto the Kimberley Block, all along the Yampi Shelf and Londonderry High, are potential targets.
Any traps and structures on the migration route from the mature source in the basin to the onlaps on the eastern edge are also potential targets.
Valley-fill type reservoirs formed on the flanks of the Kimberley Block and the persistent high platforms could be another important stratigraphic trapage  Inversion of Paleozoic basin areas and other strata by the Timorese Orogeny might be additional targets for investigation.
Hourglass structures of Tithonian reservoir sandstones sealed laterally by faults during Tertiary tectonic events are described by Maung and others (1994).
