In the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains and the area to the south, the Ellesmerian sequence lies unconformably on the pre-Mississippian sequence and has a thickness on the order of 1000-1500 m.
It is composed mostly of Upper Paleozoic to Early Mesozoic shallow marine sedimentary rocks thought to represent an ancient south-facing passive margin (presentday coordinates).
The Ellesmerian sequence includes the Kekiktuk Conglomerate and Kayak Shale of the Endicott Group (Mississippian, “Me,” Plate SM1, Figure SM3), the Alapah Limestone and Wahoo Limestone of the Lisburne Group (Mississippian and Pennsylvanian, “PMl”), the Sadlerochit Group, Shublik Formation, and Karen Creek Sandstone (Permian and Triassic, “TrPs”), the Kingak Shale (Jurassic-Early Cretaceous, “KJk”), and the Kemik Sandstone and pebble shale unit (Lower Cretaceous, included in “Ks”) (Robinson et al., 1989).
The Kemik Sandstone and pebble shale unit, although formally part of the Ellesmerian sequence, are located above the regional Lower Cretaceous Unconformity and are, therefore, included in our unit Ks, which encompasses all of the Cretaceous rocks above the unconformity (Plate SM1 and Figure SM3).
North of the Sadlerochit Mountains, the thickness of the Ellesmerian sequence diminishes over a short distance by erosional truncation beneath the Lower Cretaceous unconformity, as has been documented in outcrops in the northeastern Sadlerochit Mountains (Mull, 1987; Robinson et al., 1989; Marsh Creek locality), in wells along the Canning River (Molenaar et al., 1986; Bird and Molenaar, 1987; Bird, Chapage GG) and in seismic images northwest of the Sadlerochit Mountains (Grow et al., Chapage NA).
The position of the truncation limit of the Ellesmerian sequence in the area of our transect is not known precisely but probably is located between the Sadlerochit Mountain front and the south end of line AN84-6, in the region D-E in Figure SM2 and Plate SM1a.
Along seismic lines AN84-6 (E-F) and AN85-8 (FG), the Ellesmerian sequence appears to be completely absent; one can see dipping reflections in the basement that are truncated by a regional unconformity (interpreted as the Lower Cretaceous unconformity) and onlapped or downlapped by clinoforms typical of the Brookian sequence.
The seismic reflection signature that is typical of the Ellesmerian sequence (Potter et al., Chapage BD; Grow et al., Chapage NA) is absent.
Along our transect, the Brookian sequence is composed of Cretaceous and Tertiary foreland basin deposits, including condensed shale and interbedded bentonites of the Hue Shale (Lower to Upper Cretaceous) and turbidites and deltaic deposits of the Canning and Sagavanirktok Formations (Cretaceous to Tertiary).
For the purposes of the cross-section and kinematic models, we have divided these units according to age, e.g., “Ks,” Cretaceous; “Tp,” Paleocene; “Tel,” Lower Eocene; “Teu,” Upper Eocene; “To,” Oligocene; and “Tplm,” Miocene-Pliocene (Figure SM3, Plate SM1).
Age assignments were based on biostratigraphy from the Alaska State A-1 well at Flaxman Island, as reported by Poag (Chapage BI; Figure SM4), and proprietary paleontological data from shot-holes along the south end of seismic line 84-6.
Units Ks and Tp are composed mainly of deepwater, shale-rich turbidites of the Canning Formation in the northern part of the coastal plain, with increasing amounts of deltaic clastics upsection and toward the south.
These deposits are thought to represent a northeastward-prograding molasse-flysch sequence.
They are overlain by “Tel,” a shallow-water, transgressive marine shale unit known as the Mikkelsen tongue of the Canning Formation.
The overlying units, Teu, To, and Tplm, are composed mainly of coarser-grained, deltaic facies of the Sagavanirktok Formation.
Implications for the timing of Brookian deformation, based on the stratigraphy of the Brookian sequence, will be discussed below in the section on the timing of deformation.
Two generations of structures have been recognized in the area of the transect: (1) structures involving basement rocks only, representing a pre-Mississippian deformational event, and (2) structures involving basement and overlying rocks of the Ellesmerian and Brookian sequences, a class of structures thought to represent Tertiary deformation associated with the Brookian orogeny.
According to these results, the Shublik Formation matured rapidly in Paleocene to Eocene time, mainly due to sedimentary burial beneath the Lower Tertiary turbidites.
By middle to late Eocene time, the Shublik at history point 1 and the area to the south had attained Ro values in excess of 2.0, suggesting that it had probably generated all of its hydrocarbons by that time in the southern part of the model.
If the model predictions are correct, then the southern area of the Shublik generated its oil prior to the development of major structures in this area.
The relatively low thermal maturity in the north raises the possibility for ongoing oil generation after mid-Eocene time from the Shublik Formation in the northern part of the transect.
Finally, we show the predicted oil generation from the type II kerogen in the Shublik Formation, again in terms of the selected history points (Figure SM16).
According to our model, all three history points moved through "Peak Oil Generation" during deposition of the Paleocene flysch unit ("Ps") between 65-55 Ma.
According to our kinematic scenario, this is about 10 Ma before the onset of basement-involved thrusting in this area and probably predates development of any sizable structural traps.
However, there is a possibility that the small wedge of Shublik Formation north of history point 3 underwent peak oil generation after the initiation of the deformation.
There is also potential for stratigraphically higher source rocks, such as the Hue Shale and Mikkelsen Tongue of the Canning Formation, to have generated oil after major structural traps had formed.
Considering that the bulk of the Shublik was generating its oil in Paleocene time, we can examine the kinematic states for this period (Figure SM6, States 2 and 3) to estimate the probable migration direction for that oil.
In States 2 and 3 the Shublik Formation has a definite southward dip, suggesting that migration at that time would have been toward the north, presumably toward the area where it is truncated by the Lower Cretaceous unconformity.
After deformation started, in Middle Eocene time, the northern part of the Shublik, north of history point 2 (Figure SM6, States 5-10), reversed to a northward dipage This suggests that oil generated from this small wedge of Shublik probably migrated southward toward the structural high associated with the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountain uplifts.
According to our model for the kinematic and thermal history of this part of the northeastern Brooks Range, source rocks in the Shublik Formation had matured by Early Eocene time, before the onset of deformation in this area.
This suggests that contractional structures in this region are poor exploration targets for petroleum derived from the Shublik source.
Stratigraphic targets are more prospective, particularly in the northern part of the transect, because the migration direction was probably toward the north during Paleocene time, when the main area of the Shublik Formation was generating oil.
Most of the Brookian sequence in this area is composed of shaly turbidites, becoming more distal toward the north, so the Ellesmerian sequence may be a more promising section for finding a suitable reservoir for the Paleocene oil.
The small wedge of Shublik Formation that is thought to be present to the north side of the Sadlerochit Mountain front may have generated oil after the Paleocene, and perhaps after the formation of contractional structures associated with the Brookian orogeny.
Oil generated after the onset of deformation would probably have migrated southward, into the area of the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains structural high.
We did not model the maturation of younger source rocks in this area, namely the Hue Shale and the Mikkelsen Tongue of the Canning Formation.
Those units are higher in the stratigraphic section, so their timing of maturation was certainly younger and therefore more favorable for charging structural traps formed during the Brookian orogeny.
The thermal history of rocks in the Ellesmerian and Brookian sequences in the area of the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains began with progressive heating during sedimentary burial in Early Cretaceous to Early Eocene time, followed by episodic cooling in Middle Eocene and Oligocene time, and possibly a third cooling episode in Miocene to Recent time, not recorded by fission-track ages.
Rocks in the foreland basin, north of the Marsh Creek anticline, had a simpler thermal history, characterized by ongoing, progressive heating from the Early Cretaceous time to Recent times.
Shublik Formation oil source rock maturation occurred mainly before the initiation of the Brookian structures and probably generated oil during Paleocene to Early Eocene time.
Because of the regional southward flexure in the transect area at that time, migration was probably toward the north, i.e., toward the distal part of the foreland basin.
The northernmost wedge of the Shublik Formation may have generated oil later, perhaps in the Middle Eocene after deformation had begun to uplift the Shublik and Sadlerochit Mountains.
Oil generated from the Shublik Formation in Middle Eocene time or later probably migrated southward into the newly formed Shublik-Sadlerochit structural high.
Our results for the Shublik Formation suggest that the stratigraphically higher source rocks could have generated oil after formation of structural traps associated with the Brookian orogeny.
