This assessment unit is defined as that part of the petroleum system where the following conditions favorable for continuous gas accumulations are met in wells (Spencer, 1987):
Overpressure exists.
The bottom hole temperature is greater than 200 degrees.
The vitrinite reflectance is greater than 0.8 percent.
Permeabilities are low.
No gas/water contacts have been reported.
The 10,000-ft depth contour at the top of the petroleum system approximates where the favorable conditions overlap for the Mowry Composite Total Petroleum System.
The AU boundary is drawn to follow this contour except along where the AU boundary is defined by the footwall cutoff of the Hogsback-Prospect thrust, essentially the same boundary as the province and the TPS.
The assessment unit includes a transition zone where reservoirs can be either gas charged or water saturated.
Input data for this assessment unit are provided in Appendix B.
Exploration of the province began in the early 1900's (IHS Energy Group, 2001); since then, 3,193 wells are interpreted to have tested the Mowry Composite TPS units for petroleum.
Of these wells, 2,527 are listed as producers and 666 are interpreted to be dry holes for the TPS (figure 9).
Estimated ultimate recoveries (EUR) were calculated for about 550 of these producing wells completed between 1954 and 2000, and about 4 percent of these wells were determined to be below our minimum EUR of 0.02 BCFG.
The 4 percent is extrapolated to all producing wells to give a value of 101 producing wells below the minimum EUR (figure 9).
Production data used in this study included about 550 wells completed between 1954 and 2000 (figure 10).
An EUR distribution, truncated  to include only wells producing above our minimum (0.02 BCF), was used to help predict the potential recoveries for future addition to reserves (figures 10 and 11).
For details of the methods used to calculate EURs see Cook (Chapter 23, this CD-ROM).
The early third of the data had a median EUR of 0.5 BCF, the median being 50 percent of that sample.
This EUR probably reflects limiting factors related to the technology of the day and the early geologic concepts that existed in the beginning stages of development.
The second third,  with a median EUR of 1.3 BCF, reflects success related to solving the technological and geological problems of the early third, while the late third, with a median value of 0.5 BCF suggests that the best wells may have already been drilled or that interference exists in drainage areas among wells (Ira Pasternack, Colorado School and Mines, written commun., 2004).
Better technology and more subtle strategies may be needed to increase median EURs in the future.
The estimated size of the assessment unit is 11,500,000 acres (figure 3).
Drainage area per cell of untested cells with potential for additions to reserves is estimated to be distributed within a range of 40 and 300 acres, with a median of 120 acres, and is based on current and anticipated well-spacing information for the assessment unit area.
The area of the assessment unit that is already tested can be calculated by applying the median cell size of 120 acres to 3,193 tested cells drilled in the unit and equals about 4 percent.
The untested area, about 96 percent of the 11.5 million acres, interpreted to have potential is based on the concept that these low permeability sandstones require enhanced natural fracturing or better than normal porosity in order to have completions above the minimum EUR.
A median value of about 9 percent of the untested assessment unit area is thought to have potential for additions to reserves in the next 30 years (Appendix B).
The EUR distribution used for the untested area is based on historical values but is truncated to exclude wells below the 0.02 BCF minimum (figure 11).
The median estimated EUR of 0.7 BCF is based on the actual median value shown on the truncated EUR distribution (figure 11), and the maximum EUR is estimated at 15 BCF based on the best historical well shown in the late third split (figure 10).
Potential for adding to reserves in the next 30 years could come from: 
Infill drilling around existing production;
Recompletions in the Frontier from producing holes in the Dakota or Morrison Formation;
Hypothetical accumulations in the Frontier, including: (a) Fractured areas around the flanks of the Rock Springs Uplift, (b) Top-truncated lowstand deltas in the Frontier east of the Rock Springs uplift, and (c) Possibly deeper targets in relatively thick reservoir units in the Frontier in the northeastern Great Divide Basin.
The Mowry Conventional Oil and Gas Assessment Unit is estimated to contain a mean of 6.60 million barrels of oil, 11.20 billion cubic feet of associated gas, and 1.60 million barrels of associated natural gas liquids (table 1).
Gas fields within the assessment unit are estimated at the mean to be 195.10 billion cubic feet of gas and 3.90 million barrels of natural gas liquids (table 1).
The Mowry Continuous Gas Assessment Unit has a mean estimate of 8,542.80 billion cubic feet of gas and 170.9 million barrels of natural gas liquids (table 1).
