The Kohat-Potwar Intrathrust assessment unit (AU) (80260101), is also a composite.
The rocks of this AU include sandstones, shales, and coals of deltaic to fluvial facies and carbonates and shales of shelf environments and range in age from Eocambrian to Miocene.
Based on data current to 1996 provided by Petrocon­sultants International Data Corporation, the Kohat-Potwar geologic province was ranked 174th in cumulative production and reserves of oil and gas worldwide (Klett and others, 1997).
The Kohat-Potwar geologic province (8026) did not meet the minimum cumulative production cutoff to be included in the assessment as a priority province, but due to its long history of oil production, remaining potential, and geologic and geographic relationship with the rest of the Greater Indus Basin, it was categorized as a boutique province for the USGS World Petroleum Assessment 2000 (U.S. Geological Survey World Energy Assessment Team, 2000).
Known petroleum volumes are 0.3 billion barrels of oil (BBO) and 1.9 trillion cubic feet of gas (TCFG) for a total of 0.7 billion barrels of oil equivalent (BBOE) including natural gas liquids (Petroconsultants, 1996); this volume is less than 0.1 percent of world volume (excluding the United States).
In the Kohat-Potwar geologic province 18 oil and 3 gas fields had been discovered by 1996 (Petroconsul­tants, 1996).
Previous estimates of undiscovered oil and gas in this region include those by Kingston (1986) and Masters and others (1998).
Kingston (1986) estimated the mode of undiscovered oil in the Kohat-Potwar province at 0.1 BBO and gas at 0.1 TCF.
Masters and others (1998) estimated the mean for undiscovered oil in this province as 0.12 BBO and the mean for undiscovered gas as 3.0 TCF.
The methodology utilized in those assessments employed analogs from wellknown productive regions of the world and also relied heavily on volumetric considerations.
The 2000 assessment incorporates the petroleum system concept as defined by Magoon and Dow (1994).
The TPS used as the geologic basis of the 2000 assessment in the Kohat-Potwar geologic province is the Patala-Nammal TPS (802601).
Tables 1, 2, and 3 show the estimated ranges of assessed undiscovered oil and gas volumes allocated by assessment unit and the totals for the composite Patala-Nammal TPS.
Source-rock quality in the Kohat-Potwar geologic province is fair to good in numerous stratigraphic intervals (figure 23).
Burial depths were in the past, and are today, great enough for continued generation from many of these source intervals.
The Paleocene and Eocene source intervals have been in the oil and gas generation window in parts of the Kohat-Potwar geologic province for as long as 15 Ma, and, in places, generation continues today.
Reservoirs are of fair to very good quality and exist in close proximity to source rocks.
The presence of stacked reservoirs greatly improves opportunities for discoveries.
Trap development, although widespread, was relatively late but coincided with maximum burial and probably maximum hydrocarbon generation.
Continued crustal shortening and uplift in some cases enhanced trap quality and in others diminished or destroyed it.
Complex structures and overpressuring, although creating exploration and drilling challenges, also offer additional opportunities.
Further opportunities also exist in the Kohat Plateau area where few wells have been drilled, but source-rock quality or thickness may be lower.
The northern folded zone also has potential, although structural complexity makes exploration difficult.
