Producing and potential reservoir rocks are primarily fluvial channel sandstone beds in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde Group, and overlying lower Tertiary units including the Fort Union and Wasatch Formations in the Piceance Basin, the Wasatch Formation in the eastern part of the Uinta Basin, and the Upper Cretaceous–Paleocene North Horn Formation and the Paleocene and Eocene Colton Formation in the western part of the Uinta Basin (plates 1, 2).
Fluvial sandstone reservoir units are predominantly lenticular, and were deposited by various streams that flowed into the Uinta-Piceance Province during the Late Cretaceous and early Tertiary.
The bulk of gas production in the Mesaverde TPS is from sandstone reservoirs in the Mesaverde Group and Wasatch Formation.
In most of the Piceance Basin, Mesaverde Group reservoirs range from 20 to 60 ft thick (Tremain, 1993), and have porosities varying from less than 5 percent to greater than 8 percent (Spencer, 1996).
Mesaverde Group reservoirs are classified as tight, with permeabilities generally ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 millidarcies (mD) (Pitman and Spencer, 1984); locally, permeability may be as low as 0.0006 mD (for example, see Johnson, 1989).
In the eastern Uinta Basin (Greater Natural Buttes field), Mesaverde Group sandstone reservoirs may be as thick as 70 ft, with porosities ranging to 18 percent; typical porosities vary from 8 to 12 percent.
Reservoir permeability is usually less than 0.1 mD (Osmond, 1992).
Fluvial sandstone reservoirs in the Wasatch Formation of the Uinta Basin generally have porosities ranging from less than 5 percent to greater than 9 percent (Spencer, 1996).
In the Greater Natural Buttes area, Wasatch sandstones are also considered to be tight, and typically have permeabilities of less than 0.1 mD (Osmond, 1992).
The sandstone reservoirs are as thick as 40 ft, and have porosities generally ranging from 10 to 14 percent; locally, the porosity may be as high as 18 percent (Osmond, 1992).
Given the tight nature of gas-producing reservoirs in the Mesaverde TPS, enhanced permeability from natural fractures is often critical to successful gas production.
Sandstone reservoirs in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde Group were deposited by meandering to braided stream systems in coastal plain and alluvial plain settings (figures 19–21).
The thickness of Upper Cretaceous rocks in the Mesaverde TPS varies from about 1,500 to 2,500 ft throughout most of the Uinta Basin, the Douglas Creek arch area, and the westernmost part of the Piceance Basin.
The interval thickens to over 4,500 ft along the deep trough of the Piceance Basin (Johnson and others, 1987).
Total net sandstone thickness in beds 10 ft thick or greater in the Upper Cretaceous interval in the Piceance Basin varies from less than 500 ft along the west margin of the Piceance Basin to more than 1,900 ft along the deep basin trough (figure 22).
Reinecke and others (1991), in a study of the Grand Valley field in the south-central part of the Piceance Basin (figure 3), estimated that a typical drill hole encounters approximately 30 discrete sandstone units within the Upper Cretaceous interval.
The total net thickness of such sandstone units in Grand Valley field varies from about 1,050 to 1,150 ft; individual sandstone beds average about 37 ft in thickness.
Paleocene and Eocene strata are separated from the underlying Mesaverde Group over much of the Uinta and Piceance Basins by an unconformity.
Sandstones in the uppermost part of the Mesaverde Group are typically kaolinized as a result of extended exposure to surface weathering processes (Johnson and May, 1978, 1980).
The thickness of reservoir-bearing strata in the lower Paleocene and Eocene part of the Mesaverde TPS varies from less than 500 ft along the Douglas Creek arch to more than 5,000 ft in some of the deeper areas of the Uinta and Piceance Basins.
The overlying upper Paleocene and lower Eocene Wasatch and Colton Formations contain abundant fluvial channel sandstones deposited by north-flowing rivers as well (Chapman, 1982; Zawiskie and others, 1982; Dickinson and others, 1986).
Paleogeographic reconstructions by Ryder and others (1976) show that an extensive, sandy alluvial facies was deposited continuously in this area from middle Paleocene through early Eocene time.
These north-flowing rivers deposited the gas-productive lower Tertiary sandstone reservoirs at the Greater Natural Buttes field in the southeastern part of the Uinta Basin.
The Molina Member and “Wasatch G” sandstone reservoirs produce gas at Piceance Creek Dome and Sulphur Creek fields in the central part of the Piceance Basin, and at Parachute and Rulison fields in the southern part of the basin (figure 3).
The Molina Member and “Wasatch G” interval in the Piceance Basin grade upward into an interval of variegated mudstone and lenticular fluvial sandstone beds that are less persistent laterally.
This variegated interval grades laterally into lacustrine rocks of the Green River Formation toward the central part of the basin (plate 1).
Minor gas has been produced at shallow depths from thin, lenticular sandstone reservoirs in the interval above the Molina/Wasatch G interval at White River dome and DeBeque anticline (figure 4).
In summary, there are significant differences in the distribution of sandstone reservoirs in the Mesaverde TPS between the Uinta and Piceance Basins.
The Upper Cretaceous interval is much thicker and contains more sandstone reservoirs in the Piceance Basin than in the Uinta Basin.
In contrast, the Uinta Basin contains more lower Tertiary sandstone reservoirs than the Piceance Basin, primarily because of major, longlived river systems that flowed northward into the basin.
Lower Tertiary sandstone reservoirs in the Uinta Basin typically occur directly above the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde Group, and it is difficult to distinguish Upper Cretaceous reservoirs from lower Tertiary reservoirs in the subsurface without identifying the bleached, kaolinized zone that marks the top of the Mesaverde Groupage The only major, lower Tertiary sandstone reservoir identified thus far in the Piceance Basin is the Molina Member and equivalent units in the Wasatch Formation; these reservoirs are confined to a relatively thin stratigraphic interval.
Certain differences are also reflected in gas production in the two basins.
In the Greater Natural Buttes field in the eastern Uinta Basin (figure 3), gas production has been established through a nearly continuous interval starting in the Mesaverde Group and extending upward through much of the overlying Wasatch Formation.
The majority of production thus far has been from sandstone reservoirs in the Wasatch Formation.
In the Piceance Basin, however, the majority of gas production is from sandstone reservoirs in the Mesaverde Group, with comparatively minor production from the Molina Member and equivalent units in the Wasatch Formation.
The overall trapping mechanism for basin-centered gas accumulations in low-permeability sandstone reservoirs such as those of the Mesaverde Group in the Uinta and Piceance Basins is thought to be a capillary seal or water block (Masters, 1979).
Trapping is generally also aided by the complex, discontinuous nature of sandstone reservoirs in most basin-centered accumulations.
Water blocks probably began to form sometime after gas generation began and prior to peak gas generation (figures 14, 15).
Additional gas accumulated within closed structural traps in conventional reservoirs.
Within the basin-centered accumulations, including both continuous and transitional categories (see definitions in next section), gas-charged sandstone reservoirs are typically subdivided into relatively small isolated “compartments” with little or no communication between adjacent compartments.
Compartmentalization is aided by lateral facies changes, small fault offsets, and variations in diagenesis.
Locally, this compartmentalization has necessitated decreased well spacing (<20 acres) to effectively drain the majority of the gas-charged sandstone reservoirs.
Trapping for conventional sandstone reservoirs in the Mesaverde TPS is both structural and stratigraphic.
Lacustrine shale units in the Green River Formation overlying Mesaverde TPS reservoir-bearing strata (plate 1) appear to have acted as regional seals inhibiting the continued vertical migration of Mesaverde-sourced gas into Eocene-age and younger rocks throughout much of the Uinta and Piceance Basins.
Gases produced above the lowest thick lacustrine shale are isotopically different than gases in the underlying Mesaverde TPS.
In the Sulphur Creek field in the central part of the Piceance Basin, Johnson and Rice (1990) reported that gases from the Green River Formation were isotopically lighter than gases in the underlying Wasatch Formation and Mesaverde Groupage Similar results have been reported in the Uinta Basin (Rice and others, 1992; Johnson and others, 1994).
In the Wind River Basin of Wyoming, the lacustrine Waltman Shale Member of the Paleocene Fort Union Formation also appears to have acted as a seal prohibiting the vertical migration of gas (Johnson and Rice, 1993; Johnson and others, 1994; Johnson and Keighin, 1998).
