This report was prepared as part of the World Energy Project of the U.S. Geological Survey.
In the project, the world was divided into 8 regions and 937 geologic provinces.
The provinces have been ranked according to the discovered oil and gas volumes within each (Klett and others, 1997).
Then, 76  "priority" provinces (exclusive of the U.S. and chosen for their high ranking) and 26 "boutique" provinces (exclusive of the U.S. and chosen for their anticipated petroleum richness or special regional economic importance) were selected for appraisal of oil and gas resources.
The petroleum geology of these priority and boutique provinces is described in this series of reports.
Oil and gas reserves quoted in this report are derived from Petroleum Exploration and Production database (Petroconsultants, 1996) and other area reports from Petroconsultants, Inc., unless otherwise noted.
The Browse Basin Province 3913, offshore northern Australia, contains one important petroleum system, Late Jurassic, Early Cretaceous-Mesozoic.
It is comprised of Late Jurassic through Early Cretaceous source rocks deposited in restricted marine environments and various Mesozoic reservoir rocks deposited in deepwater fan to fluvial settings.
Jurassic age intraformational shales and claystones and Cretaceous regional claystones seal the reservoirs.
Since 1967, when exploration began in this 105,000 km2 area, fewer than 40 wells have been drilled and only one recent oil discovery is considered potentially commercial.
Prior to the most recent oil discovery, on the eastern side of the basin, a giant gas field was discovered in 1971, under a modern reef on the west side of the basin.
Several additional oil and gas discoveries and shows were made elsewhere.
A portion of the Vulcan sub-basin lies within Province 3913 where a small field, confirmed in 1987, produced 18.8 million barrels of oil (MMBO) up to 1995 and has since been shut in.
Numerous untested structures and other prospects, along with proven oil and gas accumulations, provide for many exploration opportunities and the potential for this area to be a significant contributor to the petroleum resources of Australia.
Development of infrastructure for this remote location will come with the discovery of additional reserves both here and in the adjacent Bonaparte Gulf and Timor Sea areas.
One Total Petroleum System(TPS) involving Late Jurassic through Early Cretaceous source rocks and Mesozoic reservoir rocks has been identified in the Browse Basin Province 3913, and called the Late Jurassic, Early Cretaceous-Mesozoic TPS (Figure 1).
Major subsidence in this Mesozoic basin occurred in the Cretaceous when restricted marine conditions provided for thick and high quality source rock deposition.
Maturation of this source rock is greatest in the northern portions of the area but combined vertical fault migration and long-range lateral migration have sourced discoveries in the northern, southern, central, and far eastern portions of the basin.
The area is sparsely explored.
One oil discovery in 1997 is estimated to double the proven  reserves and has increased interest in the Browse Basin as a potentially significant petroleum province of offshore Australia.
Additional hydrocarbon source rocks of Triassic and Early Jurassic age are possible.
Contributions from these source rocks are not well documented.
The Browse Basin Province 3913 is situated offshore of Western Australia along the northern coast (Figure 1).
Most of the province lies in the Timor Sea.
It includes the Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Australia (Figure 2).
The province is bounded to the north by the waters of Indonesia, to the southwest by the Northwest Shelf Province 3948, to the northeast by the Bonaparte Gulf Basin Province 3910 and to the southeast by the offshore part of the Kimberley Basin craton.
Most of the province lies within the jurisdiction of offshore Western Australia; the remainder within the waters of the Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands (Figure 2).
The Browse Basin covers an area of approximately 105,000 km2 between the Scott Plateau and the Ashmore Platform to the west and north and offshore portions of the Kimberley Block to the east (Butcher 1989) (Figure 2).
The Scott Plateau covers another 80,000 km2 (Stagg, 1978).
Main units of the province include, from the eastern edge of the Scott Plateau, the Seringapatam sub-basin or outer Browse sub-basin, the central or Caswell sub-basin, the inner Browse sub-basin, and the southern portion of the Vulcan sub-basin (Figure 2).
Along the eastern edge of the province, sediments of the Browse Basin onlap subsurface extensions of the Kimberley Block.
These extensions are known as the Yampi Shelf, the Leveque Shelf to the south, and the Londonderry High (or Arch) to the north (Figure 2).
A hinge zone on the margin of the Yampi Shelf defines the edge of the Prudhoe structural terrace.
Ocean crust of the Argo Abyssal Plain lies west of the Scott Plateau.
The Ashmore Platform and the Timor Trough lie to the north (Hocking and others, 1994; Baillie and others, 1994; Haston and Farrelly, 1993; Willis, 1988; Stephenson and Cadman, 1994).
The Kimberley Block consists of approximately 5 to 8 km of Proterozoic basin rocks over approximately 9 km of Archaean rocks (AGSO North West Shelf Study Group, 1994).
The Yampi Shelf is composed of Cretaceous and Tertiary sediments that overlie Precambrian basement of the Kimberley Block.
Further west, the Prudhoe Terrace consists of steeply dipping Precambrian basement rocks that are onlapped by northeast trending block-faulted Permian sediments, which are in turn onlapped by Late Jurassic age clastics.
Total estimated thickness of Mesozoic strata is 3.5 km.
Permian through Jurassic age sediments pinch out on the flanks of the Scott Plateau, which consists of Precambrian and Paleozoic rocks.
A thin section of Cretaceous and Recent sediments are present on top of the plateau (Stephenson and others, 1994).
The Kimberley Block and the Scott Plateau are considered to be the sources of clastics within the Browse Basin.
Portions of the Ashmore Platform were emergent from Late Triassic through Cretaceous and may also have contributed sediment to the province (Bradshaw and Sayers, 1996).
This province is part of the Westralian Supersystem (Bradshaw, 1993) that reaches from the Exmouth Plateau (to the southwest), northeast to Papua New Guinea and links basins that share an history of extension, breakup and sea floor spreading during the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous (Bradshaw and others 1994).
The basins of this offshore margin share an overall stratigraphy of Triassic to Cretaceous reservoirs that were sourced primarily by Jurassic rocks, sealed by Cretaceous rocks and overlain by Cretaceous and Tertiary shelf carbonates (Figure 3).
The Browse Basin began to accumulate sediments in the Carboniferous.
Sediments accumulated in the intracratonic basin or continental seaway that formed roughly along the present shelf and connecting the Paleozoic Canning rift basin with the Paleozoic Bonaparte Gulf rift basin around the seaward edge of the Kimberley Block (Stephenson and Cadman, 1994) (Figures 3 and 4).
The majority of subsidence and sediment accumulation occurred in Cretaceous time (Bradshaw and others, 1994).
The region received mostly coastal plain, deltaic, and shallow water sediments during Triassic to early Late Jurassic (Oxfordian) times.
It was connected north to the Tethys Sea between the Ashmore Plateau and a continental block that included the Scott Plateau (Bradshaw and others, 1994).
Occasional marine connections, southwest, to the Rowley sub-basin and a persistent marine passage, north, between the Scott Plateau and the Ashmore Platform are present on maps by Bradshaw and Sayers (1996).
Faulting in Triassic time followed by Jurassic rifting, resulted in the separation of a continental block from the Scott Plateau and formation of the Argo Abyssal Plain in Late Jurassic.
These events produced northeast-trending tilted fault blocks, subsidence of the central basin, uplift of the Ashmore Platform and Scott Plateau, basalts, tuffs, and volcanics, and a widespread late Middle Jurassic (Callovian) to middle Late Jurassic (Kimmeridgian) breakup unconformity (Willis, 1988; Stephenson and Cadman, 1994).
The subsequent drift phase resulted in extensive marine flooding of the Browse Basin that began in the central portions of the basin and eventually flooded highs and the eastern basin margin.
The Scott Reef trend was covered by Upper Jurassic (Tithonian) marine claystone.
Open ocean circulation occurred in middle Cretaceous with subsidence of the Ashmore Platform and the Scott Plateau.
Younger tectonic events in the northern part of the basin are associated with the Timorese Tertiary orogeny.
The Browse Basin contains Permian, Mesozoic and Cenozoic rocks that reach a maximum thickness of 17 km in the central or Caswell sub-basin (Hocking and others, 1994).
Approximately 8 km of Late Carboniferous-Early Permian shallow marine, deltaic carbonates, and clastics were deposited adjacent to the Prudhoe terrace.
These sediments onlap basement to the southeast, and thin to the northwest.
Permian sediments directly overlie eroded Precambrian basement along the eastern flank of the Browse Basin (Stephenson and others, 1994).
Deposition in this area ceased with uplift that was associated with the Late Permian Bedout Movement.
The Triassic section is approximately 2 km thick in the center of the basin, and consists mainly of  Lower Triassic (Scythian) to Middle Triassic (Anisian) marine claystones.
Sedimentary rocks on the eastern margin originated as fluvial sands, and deltaic sands and clays.
Rocks in the northern areas of the basin include shelf carbonates, shales, and deltaic sandstones.
Rocks to the west originated as clays, limes, sandy dolomites, and deltaic sands deposited on a marine shelf.
A widespread erosional unconformity formed during Middle to Late Triassic (Ladinian-Carnian) time resulted from tectonic reactivation in the Rowley sub-basin to the south of this province.
Transpressional uplift, faulting and block rotation occurred in the Late Triassic-Early Jurassic.
Lower-Middle Jurassic sediments are approximately l km thick.
Uplift associated with formation of the Argo Abyssal Plain is represented by a Middle to Upper Jurassic (Callovian-Oxfordian) unconformity.
Middle and Late Jurassic time was marked by volcanics, which in places overlie the unconformity.
A regional claystone, about 1.5 km thick, was deposited during Early to early Late Cretaceous (Valaginian-Cenomanian) time and sealed Jurassic rocks of the Scott Reef area.
Regional deposition of carbonates began, in earnest, in the Late Cretaceous (Turonian) across the entire Browse Basin.
These marls, calcarenties and calcilutites, deposited in the center of the basin to approximately 3.5 km thick, interfingered with clastics at the northern and northeastern margins.
The present carbonate shelf edge lies approximately at the Scott Reef trend.
The southern portions of the Vulcan sub-basin are included in Province 3913.
The structure of this sub-basin is traced, from seismic, under the Browse basin where resolution becomes poor (Pattillo and Nicholls, 1990).
The Vulcan graben lies between the Ashmore Platform and the Londonderry High (Figure 4b).
The Permian seismic reflector indicates approximately 4,000 m of vertical fault displacement of the Vulcan sub-basin adjacent to the Londonderry High (Pattillo and Nicholls, 1990).
Subsidence occurred in two adjacent half grabens in the southern Vulcan sub-basin from Middle Jurassic (Callovian) time to middle Late Jurassic (Kimmeridgian) time.
Slower subsidence with widespread deposition continued to Early Cretaceous (Valanginian) time.
Pattillo and Nicholls (1990) suggest that submarine fans and fan deltas were deposited along the graben flanks during Late Jurassic subsidence.
Post-subsidence deposition prograded northwest from the Londonderry High across to and thinning over the Ashmore Platform.
Stratigraphic nomenclature is not well established and varies among areas and authors (Symonds and others, 1994; Maung and others, 1994).
Most authors refer to rock units in time without using stratigraphic names.
Nomenclature from the adjacent Bonaparte Gulf area and the Vulcan sub-basin is sometimes applied (Figure 3).
The presence of the Browse sedimentary basin was recognized from an aeromagnetic survey in 1963.
Seismic surveys followed in 1964 and the first well was drilled in 1967 on the Ashmore Platform (Butcher, 1989).
Between 1971 and 1997, thirty wells were drilled in the Browse Basin.
Water depths of  greater than 200 m to 2000 m has impeded exploration (Maung and others, 1994).
Seismic data imaging problems beneath the Cretaceous and Tertiary carbonate shelf have been encountered in the Browse Basin.
There are reported drilling difficulties due to clay sensitivity, excess pore pressure, and lost circulation in the Tertiary carbonate section can be severe (Willis, 1988).
The Scott Reef giant gas discovery made in 1971, probably the largest gas field in Australia (IKODA Pty Ltd, 1997b), was only the third well drilled in the Browse Basin.
Three more gas discoveries, one interpreted gas discovery, three oil discoveries, and one interpreted oil discovery have been made with only one oil discovery considered potentially commercial, Cornea (IKODA Pty Ltd, 1997a) (Table 1).
