The delineation of the hypothetical Dollar Bay Shoal-Reef Dolomite Oil play (figure 7) is based on (1) interpretations of well-log data obtained from a series of onshore wells reporting numerous shows (Winston, 1971) and (2) the paleoenvironmental reconstructions of Winston (1971) and Mitchell-Tapping (1990) of the reservoir tidal shoal and patch reef facies; the data of Faulkner and Applegate (1986) were also used to delineate this play.
In the onshore portion of the South Florida Basin, the youngest formation that shows characteristics favorable for petroleum generation and accumulation is the Lower Cretaceous Dollar Bay Formation, the uppermost unit of the Big Cypress Group (figure 2).
The unit lies 1,500 ft or more above the Sunniland Formation and is as much as 620 ft thick in some parts of the basin.
Onshore, the unit ranges in thickness from about 475 ft to 550 ft.
Many wells penetrating the Dollar Bay Formation in south Florida have reported low-gravity (about 17° API) oil shows or tarry residues in both limestone biohermal deposits and an upper dolomite section; however, there has been no commercial production from this play.
Like the Sunniland Formation, the Dollar Bay commonly consists of evaporite-carbonate cycles of anhydrite, dolomite, and limestone.
These evaporite-carbonate beds formed during a transgressive-regressive cycle; some thin beds of calcareous shale, salt, and lignite are also present (Applin and Applin, 1965; Mitchell-Tapping, 1990).
In certain areas of the basin, however, limestone is the dominant lithology of the formation.
Speculative production in the Dollar Bay Formation will be from leached limestone units in the middle part of the formation or from a dolomite section in the upper part of the formation.
Mitchell-Tapping (1990) stated that reservoirs exist in tidal shoal deposits and patch reefs in a tidal flat, lagoonal, restricted-marine setting, and in a subtidal platform, open-marine setting.
Potential reservoirs include (1) porous, leached, and dolomitized grainstone units in the upper portions of isolated debris mounds, (2) isolated patch reefs in the middle part of the Dollar Bay Formation, and (3) a porous dolomite unit in the upper part of the formation (Mitchell-Tap-ping, 1990).
These potential reservoirs have measured porosities of about 10–30 percent and permeabilities of about 5–60 millidarcies.
Traps are created because these reservoirs are draped with impermeable, micritic, tidal-flat, and in some cases argillaceous lime mudstone units and anhydrite.
The formation is underlain by thick, dense nodular and nodular-mosaic anhydrite units of the Gordon Pass Formation.
Oil and tarry residues recorded in wells that penetrate the Dollar Bay Formation are believed to originate within the formation (Palacas, 1978a, 1978b; Winston, 1971).
The organic-matter content of the Dollar Bay Formation ranges from very lean to fairly rich, with some beds containing more than 3 weight percent TOC; the average TOC of the Dollar Bay is about 0.6 weight percent (Palacas, 1978a, 1978b).
Most petroleum explorationists infer that rocks of the Dollar Bay Formation located updip and to the northeast of the Sunniland trend are thermally immature and probably have not generated hydrocarbons of commercial quality and quantity (Montgomery, 1987).
Others strongly disagree, however, and predict that the Dollar Bay Formation has been overlooked and should be a considered a primary oil target with good resource potential (Winston, 1971; Palacas, 1978a, 1978b; Mitchell-Tapping, 1990).
Offshore, in the more central portion of the basin where the Dollar Bay Formation lies at depths of more than 10,000 ft, the formation rocks should be more thermally mature.
Based on one major show that consisted of 15 ft of free oil, API gravity measured 17° at a depth of about 10,000 ft.
Thus, API gravities of oil from this play are expected to be low and probably range from 15° to 20° (Mitchell-Tapping, 1990); sulfur contents are similar to those of Sunniland-type oils (2–4 percent).
Moreover, the inferred presence of patch reefs and more complex structures in the Federal offshore region, and the increased thermal maturity of rocks of the Dollar Bay Formation in the offshore portion of the basin, enhance the potential for new field discoveries and commercial oil production.
The Dollar Bay Formation was assessed to have the second largest volume of undiscovered oil with a total mean volume of about 66 MMBO.
The median number of discoveries was 8 at a median field size of 10 MMBO (table 1).
