The play is characterized by probable CO2 (carbon dioxide)-rich gas accumulations in Paleozoic carbonate reservoirs in footwall anticlinal traps on the extensional axis of the Moxa Arch.
The arch is a north-south-trending regional basement uplift in the western Green River Basin that extends north from the Utah boundary for about 100 mil before swinging northwest at LaBarge where it passes beneath the leading edge of the Hogsback thrust.
At this point, within the thrust belt, the axial portion of the arch is part of a large, thrust-faulted northwest-southeast-trending productive structural feature, about 40 mi long and 18 mi wide, locally termed the LaBarge Anticline.
From here, the axis of the arch bends again and trends in a northerly direction for about 100 mi, its crestal portion lying below the surface trace of the Darby Thrust.
The area of the play follows this extension, its width varying from 6 to 10 mi, from the southeast part of the LaBarge area to an estimated termination south of Jackson, Wyoming.
Recognized and potential reservoirs in the play are in the Ordovician Bighorn Dolomite, Devonian Darby Formation, Mississippian Madison Group, Permian Phosphoria Formation, and possibly the Pennsylvanian Wells Formation (Tensleep Sandstone).
Major CO2-rich gas reservoirs occur mainly in porous dolomite and limestone units of the 850 ft thick Madison, a substantial portion of which is of very good reservoir quality, with porosities greater than 6 percent and as much as 30 percent.
The 450 ft thick Bighorn has tested high volumes of CO2-rich gas in five wells, and core analysis in one of the wells showed an average porosity in one dolomite zone of 11 percent and an average permeability of 77 mD.
Reservoirs in the 360 ft thick Darby and 320 ft thick Phosphoria have also yielded significant quantities of gas from generally low porosity, fractured dolomite units.
Reservoir development in the Wells is minimal, although substantial initial amounts of gas have been recovered in a few wells.
All productive reservoirs contain CO2, CH4 (methane), N (nitrogen), H2S (hydrogen sulfide), and He (helium).
Dark-gray to black, phosphatic shale of the Phosphoria Formation is the apparent primary source rock for hydrocarbons in the play.
Various studies indicate that hydrocarbon generation in the Phosphoria began in Late Jurassic time in the far western part of the thrust belt.
Hydrocarbons were expelled, over time, and migrated eastward into the thrust belt area and beyond.
Cores from Paleozoic reservoir rocks include fractures filled with dead oil in wells in the LaBarge area.
It is postulated that these hydrocarbons were from a Phosphoria source that later accumulated in the Madison and Weber (Tensleep).
Subsequent thermal degradation altered the original liquid hydrocarbons into solid bitumen, methane, CO2, and H2S.
In addition to the CO2-rich productive wells on the LaBarge anticline, two wells north of the LaBarge area appear to have drilled into the subthrust Paleozoic rocks that constitute the Moxa Arch Extension Play.
The wells tested large volumes of CO2-rich gas in Madison carbonate rocks, similar to the gas mix at LaBarge.
Traps are speculated to be mostly anticlinal, similar in style to the thrust-faulted footwall trap on the LaBarge Anticline.
Seals include anhydrite beds in the upper part of the Madison and in overlying shales of Pennsylvanian age.
Drilling depths are estimated to range from 10,000 to 18,000 ft to Madison and Bighorn targets in the footwall section of the arch extension.
The first well to penetrate the Paleozoic section and establish the presence of CO2-rich gas in the area of the play was completed in 1961, and was located on the crestal part of the LaBarge Anticline.
More than 50 additional wells have been drilled to Paleozoic targets, clustered mainly on this feature, since the initial test well was drilled.
Flow rates in these wells are substantial, ranging from 8 to 18 MMCFPD, with the CO2 content of total gas increasing with the age or depth of the containing formation.
CH4 content of total gas varies, but an estimated average CH4 content in the Madison is about 20 percent.
Gas from a typical well completed in the Madison analyzed 19 percent CH4, 70 percent CO2, 7 percent N , 3 percent H2S, and 1 percent He.
Production reports list three individual fields within the southern area of the play, Fogarty Creek, Graphite, and Lake Ridge (Number 10, 11, 14, figure 2), discovered in 1976, 1986, and 1981, respectively; these fields are within the overall LaBarge Anticline complex.
Cumulative production from 27 wells to the end of 1992 was 1.2 TCFG and 61,000 barrels of condensate.
Future potential for undiscovered methane resources is excellent; however, limiting factors affecting exploration include extremely rugged topography and possible restrictions to access on public lands.
