Alternating periods of transgression and regression resulted in the deposition of interbedded Cretaceous reservoir rocks and seals over a large part of northwest South America.
Maximum transgression during the Turonian-Santonian was marked by deposition of the Napo, Villeta, and Agua Caliente Formations (Macellari and de Vries, 1987).
Primary hydrocarbon seals for the Lower Cretaceous Caballos, Hollin, and Cushabatay reservoirs are interbedded shales, and shales of the overlying Villeta, Napo, and Raya Formations.
Upper reservoir seal of the Hollin Formation in the Villano Field, Oriente Basin, is a condensed sequence of limestone and shale of the Napo Formation (Jordan and others, 1997).
Napo, Villeta, Chonta, and Agua Caliente reservoir seals are interbedded marine shales, and overlying Cretaceous and Tertiary shales.
These broad intervals of seal rocks for assessment unit 60410101, Hollin-Napo, are generalized in the events chart (figure 6).
The unconformably overlying Maastrichtian-Paleocene Tena Formation is the main seal for sandstone reservoirs in the Napo Formation.
Possible reservoir seals for the fluvial Tena Formation reservoirs are interbedded mudstones and possible low-permeability facies of the unconformably overlying Tiyuy­acu Formation.
Vivian Formation fields are capped by the unconformably overlying Paleocene and Eocene Yahuarango Formation.
Villeta reservoir seals include the overlying Olini Group, Rumiyaco Formation, and Pepino Formation (S. Rushworth, Consultant, written commun., 1998; Petroconsult­ants, 1996).
The Cretaceous Agua Caliente Formation is thickly bedded, is mature in texture and mineralogy, and has porosities as much as 25 percent.
Reservoir seals are interbedded shales of the lower part of the overlying Chonta Formation.
Intraforma­tional sandstones of the Chonta vary in thickness up to 300 m (90 ft) and form reservoirs in the Maranon and Ucayali Basins (Mathalone and Montoya, 1995).
The probable main reservoir seal for Napo Formation gas fields in the Basin-Center Gas assessment unit (60410102) are interbedded and overlying marine shales (figure 7).
The previously listed seals for conventional Napo Formation oil fields could also be barriers to gas migration in this hypothetical unit.
Potential seals for the hypothetical Paleozoic TPS (604102) would be interbedded and capping shales of the Permian Ene Formation and the overlying Mitu Group (figure 8).
