The Travis Peak and Hosston Formations represent a Lower Cretaceous basinward-thickening wedge of terrigenous clastic sedimentary rocks that underlies the northern Gulf of Mexico Basin from east Texas and southern Arkansas across northern Louisiana into southern Mississippi and eastward.
Clastic influx was focused in two main fluvial-deltaic depocenters associated with the ancestral Red River in east Texas and the ancestral Mississippi River in southern Mississippi and northeast Louisiana.
The Travis Peak Formation is divided into three informal depositional intervals across its hydrocarbon-productive trend in east Texas; the intervals are differentiated by the relative amounts of sandstone and shale.
A thin lower interval consists of mixed sandstones and shales interpreted as delta-fringe deposits.
It is gradationally overlain by a thick, sandstone-rich interval that forms the bulk of the Travis Peak section composed primarily of stacked, braided-channel sandstones grading up into meandering-channel deposits.
The third and uppermost interval consists of mixed sandstone and mudstone interpreted as coastal-plain and marine deposits.
Most hydrocarbon production from the Travis Peak Formation in east Texas and northern Louisiana is from drilling depths of 6,000–10,000 ft.
Throughout that interval, porosity and permeability of Travis Peak sandstones decrease significantly with depth.
Decreasing porosity with depth results primarily from (1) increased quartz cement and (2) decreased secondary porosity, which was derived almost exclusively from dissolution of feldspar.
Decreasing permeability with depth occurs mainly because of (1) decreased porosity, which in turn is caused principally by increasing quartz cement, and (2) increased overburden pressure that closes narrow pore throats.
The most likely source rocks for gas and oil produced from Travis Peak sandstones are laminated carbonate mudstones of the Upper Jurassic Smackover Formation and organic-rich shales of the Upper Jurassic Bossier Shale of the underlying Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous Cotton Valley Groupage Burial- and thermal-history data for east Texas and northern Louisiana suggest that onset of dry-gas generation from Smackover mudstones and the Bossier Shale started at about 80 Ma and 57 Ma, respectively.
Vitrinite reflectance (Ro) values of Travis Peak shales interbedded with reservoir sandstones in east Texas indicate that these rocks have passed through the oil window and are approaching the onset of dry-gas generation.
However, these shales are primarily oxidized floodplain shales with total organic carbon contents of less than 0.5 weight percent and consequently are not considered likely sources of oil and gas.
Travis Peak marine shales down-dip in the Gulf of Mexico Basin in central Louisiana might have generated hydrocarbons, but relatively long-distance lateral migration would be necessary.
The Jurassic Smackover Interior Salt Basins Total Petroleum System is defined for this assessment to include both Upper Jurassic Smackover carbonates and calcareous shales and Upper Jurassic–Lower Cretaceous Cotton Valley Group organic-rich shales.
The Jurassic Smackover Interior Salt Basins Total Petroleum System includes three conventional Travis Peak–Hosston assessment units: Travis Peak– Hosston Gas and Oil (AU 50490205), Travis Peak–Hosston Updip Oil (AU 50490206), and Travis Peak–Hosston Hypothetical Updip Oil (AU 50490207).
A fourth assessment unit, Hosston Hypothetical Slope-Basin Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50490208), was identified but not assessed owing to a lack of geologic data.
Together, the three assessment units (excluding the Hosston Hypothetical Slope-Basin Gas Assessment Unit) are estimated to contain a mean undiscovered conventional resource of 28.92 million barrels of oil, 1,135.72 billion cubic feet of gas, and 21.54 million barrels of natural gas liquids.
