The Muddy-Frontier Sandstone and Mowry Fractured Shale Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (AU 50340261) is an established AU that is thought to have additional potential to produce gas from low permeability fluvial and estuarine sandstone reservoirs, marine deltaic and shoreface sandstone reservoirs, and fractured marine shale reservoirs.
The AU consists of two areas totaling approximately 1,500 mi2 in the center of the Bighorn Basin and in the deepest part of Clark's Fork subbasin (figure 31).
The AU boundary is defined as that part of the petroleum system where the conditions favorable for continuous gas accumulations are met using the criteria established by Spencer (1987): (1) greater than normal pressures, (2) presentday temperatures greater that 200∞ F, (3) vitrinite reflectance greater than 0.8 percent, (4) presence of low permeability sandstone or fractured shale, and (5) no reported gas/water contacts.
Based on relatively sparse data, these conditions are generally met at a depth of around 12,000 ft, except in the Clark's Fork sub-basin where the boundary is placed at a deeper level.
These contour lines have been modified where information was obtained from (1) drillstem test results and (or) mud weights that indicate greater than normal pressure gradients, (2) wells with mud logs that have gas shows in reservoir units, and (3) vitrinite reflectance data for rocks of the AU that show the area is mature for gas generation.
The south edge of the AU corresponds to a fault described by Stone (1999) and also shown by Ver Ploeg (1985), which Stone interprets to be a continuation of the Tensleep fault (figure 3).
The west boundary of the main assessment area is placed at the projected footwall cutoff of the top of the Frontier Formation, which is slightly west of the surface trace of the Oregon Basin thrust fault (see figure 25).
Potential additions to reserves would come from drilling depths ranging from about 10,500 to 21,000 ft.
There are about 144 wells within the AU boundary, of which 23 are interpreted to be wells tested in the formation.
Some of the test wells had minor production, gas shows and (or) production, and drillstem tests; others reached their total depth in the AU indicating a test.
Five wells had production above the minimum cutoff of 20 MMCFG; however, only the Sellers Draw well (see figure 23 for location) had production exceeding one BCFG.
The remaining 121 wells were either drilled in the hanging wall of the Oregon Basin thrust fault, and therefore did not test the basin center, or did not show sufficient evidence that the operator tested the units for gas; for example, in one well the Cretaceous rocks defining the AU were cased off and the obvious target was deeper in the Paleozoic strata.
The paucity of data unit makes most of the area of the AU untested and gives rise to considerable uncertainty in the evaluation of potential additions to reserves.
Analogs are drawn from similar assessment units in the Wind River and Green River Basins (Kirschbaum and Roberts, 2005; Johnson and others, 2007).
Input data for assessment of the Muddy-Frontier Sandstones and Mowry Fractured Shale Continuous Gas AU is shown on the FORSPAN ASSESSMENT MODEL FORM in Appendix A.
The minimum and maximum areas for the AU are 872,000 acres and 1,066,000 acres, respectively, with a calculated mean of 969,000 acres.
This range in area size reflects the uncertainty of the location of structures in the subsurface and the lack of data available to constrain key parameters such as the zone of overpressure.
The untested area within the AU that has potential for additions to reserves is 0.6 and 22.5 percent, respectively, with a calculated mean of 8.4 percent (Appendix A).
The range in the percentages is based on the uncertainty in the amount of area that is interpreted to have enhanced permeability due to fracturing, and on a range of success ratios that can be applied to these areas based on analog data.
The total recovery per cell or estimated ultimate recovery (EUR) for untested cells having potential for additions to reserves is 0.02 BCFG at the minimum, 0.35 BCFG at the median, and 7.5 BCFG at the maximum, with a calculated mean of 0.57 BCFG (Appendix A).
The EUR distribution is typically based on historical production, but because of the lack of data in the Bighorn Basin, analogs from the South- western Wyoming Province and Wind River Basin Province were used to help estimate a range of production (figure 32).
The median and maximum values are conservatively estimated to be half the values of the Southwestern Wyoming Province, such values being from the largest data set available for rocks of similar reservoirs properties but where, it should be noted, that the thermal maturities of the source rocks are higher overall than in the Bighorn Basin.
The minimum and maximum area per cell of untested cells having the potential for additions to reserves is 40 and 300 acres, respectively, with a calculated mean of 130 acres.
This is the most difficult parameter to determine, so these estimates are derived directly from the Mowry TPS in the Southwestern Wyoming Province (Kirschbaum and Roberts, 2005), which was based on current and anticipated well- spacing information for that area.
The mean estimate for undiscovered gas resources that have potential for additions to reserves in the Muddy- Frontier Sandstone and Mowry Fractured Shale Continuous Gas Assessment Unit (50340261) is 348 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG); tabulated assessment results are summarized in table 1.
