In 2002, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) estimated undiscovered oil and gas resources that have the potential for additions to reserves in the San Juan Basin Province (5022), New Mexico and Colorado (figure 1).
Paleozoic rocks were not appraised.
The last oil and gas assessment for the province was in 1995 (Gautier and others, 1996).
The hydrocarbon commodities quantitatively assessed include oil, gas, and natural gas liquids.
Two assessment cat egories were used, conventional and continuous.
Conventional accumulations have high matrix permeabilities, defined seals and traps, defined gas-water or oil-water contacts, and high recovery factors.
The assessment methodology for conven tional accumulations incorporates a field number and field-size distribution approach, wherein the minimum, median, and maximum numbers of undiscovered accumulations and sizes of undiscovered accumulations are estimated.
For inclusion in this study, a discrete accumulation is at least 0.5 million barrels of oil (MMBO) or 3 billion cubic feet of gas (BCFG) in size.
Continuous oil and gas accumulations include those types of accumulations where the source rocks and reservoir rocks are interbedded or are the same; the reservoir rocks are generally characterized by low permeability (except coal-bed methane plays) and may be abnormally pressured.
There is no welldefined gas-water or oil-water contact.
Included in the continuous category are low-permeability continuous-type accumulations (including basin-centered), shale oil and gas, and coal-bed gas.
In this assessment, four TPSs were defined (table 1).
These are, in ascending order, Todilto, Mancos-Menefee Composite, Lewis Shale, and Fruitland.
There were six conventional assessment units (AU) and eight continuous AUs defined (table 1).
Three assessment units - the Lewis Continuous Gas AU, Menefee Coalbed Gas AU, and Tertiary Conventional Gas AU - were not previously evaluated in prior USGS oil and gas assessments.
The Menefee Coalbed Gas AU is hypothetical because the Menefee Formation has yet to pro- duce coal-bed gas outside of the thermally mature basin center.
The Tertiary Conventional Gas AU has production from several Tertiary formations.
Several of the 1995 plays have been redefined, based on new thinking about the depositional systems and the geologic controls on oil and gas accumula- tion.
Most of the boundary changes involved assessment units in the Mancos-Menefee Composite TPS or in the Fruitland TPS.
These reconfigurations are discussed more fully in the accompanying chapters, and they make direct comparison to the 1995 assessment results difficult.
The assessment results are shown by TPS and AU in table 1.
The USGS estimated a mean of 19.10 million bar- rels of oil, 50.585 trillion cubic feet of gas (TCFG), and 148.37 million barrels of natural gas liquids of undiscovered resources.
All of the undiscovered oil resources are in conven- tional accumulations in the Todilto TPS and Mancos-Menefee Composite TPS.
Over 99 percent of the total undiscovered gas resources are estimated to be in continuous accumula- tions, primarily in the Fruitland TPS, which accounts for 57.9 percent of this estimate.
The Fruitland Formation alone accounts for 46.8 percent of the estimated undiscovered gas in continuous accumulations.
Over 97 percent of the undis- covered natural gas liquids are in continuous reservoirs in the Mancos-Menefee Composite TPS, Lewis Shale TPS, and Fruitland TPS (table 1).
A comparison of total undiscovered resources between the 1995 assessment and this 2002 assess- ment is shown in table 2.
