Landon and others (2001) believe that given the fine-grained lithology, low matrix porosity and permeability of the Niobrara, and the integrity of the overlying and interbedded seals, hydrocarbons have not migrated far from where they were generated.
Figure 10 shows that most of the oil production from the Niobrara in the SWWP is in areas where the Niobrara is thermally mature with respect to oil generation (0.60 percent to 1.35 percent Ro), with few wells producing in areas where the Niobrara is immature or marginally mature (Ro<0.60 percent).
This relationship of thermal maturity and hydrocarbon production also indicates that most of the oil that has been produced was generated in place and has not migrated great distances into less mature reservoirs.
The events chart (figure 13) summarizes the essential elements of source rock, reservoir rock, seal rock, and overburden rock and the processes of generation, migration, accumulation, and trap formation that are essential to form petroleum accumulations.
Deposition of source, reservoir, and intra-formational seal rocks of the Niobrara Formation in the SWWP occurred during Late Cretaceous time (88-84 Ma).
This was followed by deposition of several thousand feet of Mancos Shale, and equivalent Steele Shale, forming a thick, overlying regional seal.
Based on burial-history and petroleum-generation curves, the amount of overburden rock required to reach thermal maturation levels sufficient to generate oil occurred at about 72 Ma.
Critical overburden deposition was from the Mancos Shale and equivalent rocks and several thousand feet of the Mesaverde Groupage Along the shallow flanks of the basin, the Niobrara remained in the oil window until about 10-5 Ma when regional uplift and erosion occurred (preservation time).
With continued subsidence and the additional accumulation of 6,500 to 7,500 ft of sediments of the Lewis Shale, Lance Formation, and the Fort Union Formation in the deeper parts of the basin, the Niobrara passed through the oil window at approximately 59 Ma, reaching thermal maturities greater than 1.35 percent Ro and initiating thermal cracking of oil to gas (critical moment).
Because mainly oil is produced from Niobrara reservoirs that are thermally mature with respect to oil (Ro 0.60 to 1.35 percent) and Niobrara-sourced oil is not found in other reservoir rocks, it appears that little or no migration has taken place.
Fractures that form the reservoirs in brittle, calcareous-rich zones of the Niobrara developed as a result of Laramide compressional tectonics, and during post-Laramide Neogene extension.
These fractured carbonate-rock reservoirs are associated with anticlinal, synclinal, and monoclinal folds, and fault zones.
An assessment unit (AU) is a mappable volume of rock within a Total Petroleum System that contains known or postulated oil and gas accumulations that share similar geologic characteristics (Klett and others, 2000).
The Niobrara Total Petroleum System (503703) is subdivided into two AUs based on levels of thermal maturity: (1) a continuous oil assessment unit (AU 50370361), and (2) a continuous gas assessment unit (AU 50370362).
The Niobrara Continuous Oil Assessment Unit (AU 50370361) is an established AU that produces mainly oil from self-sourced, organic-rich fractured carbonate-rock reservoirs.
It encompasses approximately 4,600 mi2 and occupies the southern and eastern flanks of the Sand Wash Basin in Colorado and the eastern flanks of the Washakie and Great Divide Basins in Wyoming (figure 14).
The eastern boundary of the Continuous Oil AU, coinciding with the TPS boundary, is the base of the outcrop of the Niobrara Formation or stratigraphic equivalent strata at the base of the Mancos or Steele Shales; the southern boundary is the Axial Basin uplift (figure 1).
The western boundary is defined by the 1.35 percent Ro contour, which is generally considered the bottom of the oil window and the level of thermal maturity at which oil cracks to gas (Law, 2002; Hunt, 1996).
This AU is restricted stratigraphically to the Niobrara and equivalent rocks because there is no geochemical evidence of Niobrara-type oils being produced from other reservoir rocks, indicating little or no migration has taken place.
This is due to the presence of overlying and interbedded thick plastic shales that seal fractured Niobrara reservoirs and provide a barrier to migration.
The oil accumulations in the Niobrara and equivalent strata are of the continuous type (unconventional) using the criteria established by Schmoker (1996) and have the following characteristics:
The Niobrara Continuous Oil Assessment Unit is lightly explored with the first oil discovery at Tow Creek in 1924 (Ogle, 1961).
Since then, according to the IHS Energy Group (2001) production database, 337 wells have penetrated the Niobrara section, with approximately 150 producing from the Niobrara.
Producing intervals range in depth from 1,200 to nearly 10,000 ft.
According to Vincelette and Foster (1992), most production to date is associated with the Laramide-age anticlinal and monoclinal folds (figure 9), and many of these accumulations ("sweet spots"ù) were discovered while drilling known structures for deeper conventional reservoir horizons.
Due to the underpressured nature of the Niobrara reservoirs, it is suggested that many potential producers were bypassed because conventional drilling muds may have caused formation damage or masked shows in the Niobrara.
Potential for future discoveries in this oil AU would most likely be "sweet spots"ù formed by fractures associated with Laramide compressional features, including faults, anticlinal and synclinal trends, regional lineament features, and faulting associated with post-Laramide Neogene extension.
