In the 1980’s, gas flows were obtained from the upper part of pre-Upper Permian rocks in two fields; these discoveries are the basis for identification of the North Ustyurt Paleozoic TPS (115003).
A significant oil show was recorded in the Karakuduk deep stratigraphic test, below a thin (27 m) Upper Permian bed.
In 1989, a gas flow was tested in the Karakuduk field in the southeastern part of the TPS area.
Shortly afterward, several wells confirmed the presence of a commercial gas accumulation (Ubaykhodzhaev and others, 1992).
A gas discovery and oil and gas shows also were recorded in the southeastern part of the TPS area, on the Paleozoic Kuanysh-Koskalin uplift (the eastern part of the Mesozoic Bar­sakelmes depression in figure 2).
Gas flows were tested from the weathered upper zone of Lower–Middle Carboniferous carbonate rocks in erosional highs that were mapped on the surface of the carbonate rocks.
Only general features of the stratigraphy of pre-Jurassic rocks are known from scarce well data.
The drilled pre-Jurassic sequence of the TPS consists of three formations (Babadzhanov and others, 1986).
The lower formation is composed primarily of Upper Devonian (?) and Lower–Middle Carboniferous carbonate rocks.
The carbonates contain some shale and sandstone beds; the number and thicknesses of these beds increase westward.
Eastward, into the Sudochi depression (figure 2), the carbonates form an east-facing clinoform and grade into deepwater basinal shales (Pilipenko, 1990).
The zone of pure carbonate rocks probably is the Carboniferous shelf margin, which likely contains a barrier reef at the boundary with a deepwater basin to the east.
A similar shelf-edge reef was interpreted from seismic data offshore, on the northern slope of the Sudochi depression (Pilipenko, 1990).
The middle formation probably is Late Carboniferous– Early Permian in age.
Its maximum drilled thickness is about 800 m, but on Paleozoic uplifts the rocks were completely removed by erosion.
This formation consists of clastic rocks, some carbonate beds, tuffs, and, in places, thick porphyrites.
The stratigraphic relationships among these rock types change across the TPS.
The Upper Carboniferous–Lower Permian sequence or Lower–Middle Carboniferous carbonates are overlain unconformably by Upper Permian–Triassic red beds that constitute the upper formation.
The thickness of the red beds varies from tens to hundreds of meters, and it is substantially less than the thickness of similar rocks of this age on the Buzachi Peninsula.
Hydrocarbon source rocks of the North Ustyurt Paleozoic TPS, which produced hydrocarbon fields and shows, have not been identified.
The presence of source rocks among the Lower– Middle Carboniferous deepwater basinal facies that have been seismically mapped in the Sudochi depression and offshore in the Aral Lake (Pilipenko, 1990) is highly probable.
Hydrocarbons could have migrated into the adjacent shallow-shelf carbonates where oil and gas were tested.
On the basis of indirect evidence (significant diagenetic alteration of carbonates and clastics and the presence of volcanics), the source rocks probably are overmature with respect to oil generation.
The availability of source rocks in the Paleozoic sequence of more western areas of the TPS is uncertain.
All flows of hydrocarbons in the North Ustyurt Paleozoic TPS were obtained from the upper part of the Carboniferous carbonate sequence.
All tested hydrocarbon accumulations are in carbonate reservoirs that subcrop under the pre-Upper Permian unconformity in areas where Upper Carboniferous–Lower Permian volcanics and clastics are absent.
The reservoir rocks are fractured and leached limestones with vuggy porosity.
The porosity of the rock matrix below the zone of weathering is low (1–3 percent) and permeability is negligible (Ubaykhodzhaev and others, 1992).
Potential clastic reservoir rocks have not been identified in either Upper Carboniferous–Lower Permian marine or Upper Permian–Triassic continental formations.
Although the pre-Jurassic sequence contains several regionally identifiable reflectors (Babadzhanov and others, 1986), the resolution of seismic data is insufficient to permit detailed mapping of the structure of rocks below the pre-Jurassic unconformity.
Only locally the eroded surface of carbonate or volcanoclastic rocks directly beneath Upper Permian–Triassic red beds can be mapped for structural prospects.
The mapped and drilled prospects are erosional highs on the surface of Carboniferous carbonates that are overlain unconformably by the red beds.
Closures of several mapped highs vary from 100 to 250 m.
The highs are not expressed in the structure of the base of Jurassic rocks.
Upper Permian clastic rocks form a seal.
The North Ustyurt Paleozoic TPS includes a single Upper Paleozoic Carbonates AU (11500301).
The petroleum potential of this AU is highly speculative because of the extreme scarcity of data.
The only exploration play that has been identified at present is a zone of Lower–Middle Carboniferous carbonate rocks that extends northward across the eastern part of the Bar­sakelmes depression (figure 2).
The zone then turns eastward and continues offshore along the northern margin of the Sudochi depression.
The zone probably contains shelf-edge carbonates, including a barrier reef complex.
At least in part of that zone, carbonate rocks subcrop under the pre-Upper Permian unconformity, or they occur stratigraphically close to it.
Leaching and fracturing formed reservoir rocks at the top of the carbonate formation.
The play is strongly gas prone (table 1).
