The Mississippi Interior Salt Basin is the most productive sedimentary basin for oil and natural gas in the southeastern United States.
Sedimentation in the basin was associated with rifted margin tectonics.
The depositional history includes pre-rift, syn-rift and post-rift sedimentation.
The stratigraphic framework of the basin was defined on the basis of five regional cross sections comprised of 48 key wells totaling 837,818 ft of stratigraphic section.
The burial and thermal histories of the basin are directly linked to the tectonic and depositional histories that are closely related to the origin of the Gulf of Mexico.
The history includes phases of crustal attenuation, rifting and sea-floor spreading and subsidence.
Basin modeling indicates that variation in sediment accumulation rate is related to lithology, unit thickness, and duration of deposition.
The highest mean sediment accumulation and tectonic subsidence rates were recorded for Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous strata.
Maturity modeling indicates that Upper Jurassic carbonate mudstones (rich in algal kerogen) were effective regional source rocks throughout the basin.
Oil generation commenced from these carbonate mudstones in the Early to Late Creaceous and continued into the Paleogene.
Upper Cretaceous black shales (rich in herbaceous kerogen) were effective local source rocks in the area of the Perry sub-basin.
Oil generation was initiated from these shales in the Paleogene.
Lower Cretaceous shales are possible local source rocks in the Perry sub-basin area.
The burial and thermal histories of Paleogene shales were not conducive for the generation of hydrocarbons in this basin.
The thermal modeling indicates that effective source rocks include Upper Jurassic Smackover carbonate mudstones throughout the basin area and Upper Cretaceous Tuscaloosa shales in the south-central portion (Perry sub-basin) of the basin.
Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous shales are possible source rocks in the Perry sub-basin given the proper organic facies.
Tertiary shales have not been subjected to favorable burial and thermal histories required for petroleum generation in the basin.
Although previous workers have recognized that the Smackover is an effective regional source rock, that the Tuscaloosa is an effective source rock in the south-central portion of the basin, and that the Tertiary shales in the basin are unlikely to have served as source rocks, no information has been published regarding the source rock potential of the Lower Cretaceous shales.
From thermal maturation profiles for the wells studied in the Mississippi Interior Salt Basin, a hydrocarbon generation and maturation trend can be observed.
In wells in much of the basin, the generation of hydrocarbons from Smackover carbonate mudstones was initiated at 8,000-11,000 ft during the Early Cretaceous and continued into the Tertiary.
Hydrocarbon generation commenced at 7,000-8,000 ft from Tuscaloosa shales during the Tertiary in the Perry sub-basin.
Hydrocarbons were destroyed at a depth of 15,000 ft in the vicinity of the Jackson Dome.
The Smackover at the type locality is 700 ft in thickness, with the upper 100 ft being a porous, oolitic reservoir (Bingham, 1937).
The Lower Tuscaloosa has been a prolific petroleum reservoir in southwestern Alabama and southwestern Mississippi for many years.
The Cenozoic strata are not as productive hydrocarbon reservoirs in the Mississippi Interior Salt Basin area as Mesozoic strata.
The generation of crude oil is believed to have been initiated from basinal Smackover carbonate mudstones in the Early Cretaceous and the generation and migration of low to intermediate gravity crude oil is interpreted to have continued into the Tertiary (Nunn and Sassen, 1986; Driskill et al., 1988; Sassen and Moore, 1988).
Updip Smackover carbonate mudstones are thought to have generated low gravity crude oil beginning in the Late Cretaceous or 20 my later than the basinal mudstones (Dri kill et al., 1988).
Post-Early Cretaceous shales (Tuscaloosa, Selma and Tertiary) have been interpreted as ineffective petroleum source rocks by Driskill et al. (1988) because of their thermal immaturity (0.4% Ro) in much of the Mississippi Interior Salt Basin area.
However, the generation of crude oil is believed to have been initiated during the Tertiary locally from basinal Tuscaloosa shales, which have total organic carbon contents of up to 2.8% in the south central portion of the basin (Koons et al., 1974; Nunn and Sassen, 1986).
Norphlet, Haynesville, Cotton Valley, and Rodessa shales analyzed by previous workers were found to have total organic carbon contents of less than 0.3% (Sas en and Moore, 1988; Claypool and Mancini, 1989).
At a depth of burial of 5-6 km (approximately 16,400-19,700 ft), the Smackover mudstones are thought to be over-mature for the generation of crude oil (Nun  and Sassen, 1986; Driskill et al., 1988).
The low to intermediate crude oils that migrated into reservoirs were subjected to thermal cracking with depth of burial and time (Sassen and Moore, 1988; Claypool and Mancini, 1989).
The thermal modeling indicates that effective source rocks include Upper Jurassic Smackover carbonate mudstones throughout the basin area and Upper Cretaceous Tuscaloosa shales in the south-central portion (Perry sub-basin) of the basin.
Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous shales are possible source rocks in the Perry sub-basin given the proper organic facies.
Tertiary shales have not been subjected to favorable burial and thermal histories required for petroleum generation in the basin.
Although previous workers have recognized that the Smackover is an effective regional source rock, that the Tuscaloosa is an effective source rock in the south-central portion of the basin, and that the Tertiary shales in the basin are unlikely to have served as source rocks, no information has been published regarding the source rock potential of the Lower Cretaceous shales.
From thermal maturation profiles for the wells studied in the Mississippi Interior Salt Basin, a hydrocarbon generation and maturation trend can be observed.
In wells in much of the basin, the generation of hydrocarbons from Smackover carbonate mudstones was initiated at 8,000-11,000 ft during the Early Cretaceous and continued into the Tertiary.
Hydrocarbon generation commenced at 7,000-8,000 ft from Tuscaloosa shales during the Tertiary in the Perry sub-basin.
Hydrocarbons were destroyed at a depth of 15,000 ft in the vicinity of the Jackson Dome.
