Within the Central Alaska Province, the eastern part of the Kandik Basin (about 1,800 sq mi) is a unique region; it is an extension of cratonic North America.
The sedimentary rocks in the eastern part of Kandik Basin are within the zone of thermal maturity for oil-and (or) gas generation.
To the south, these rocks are bounded by the translational Tintina Fault and crystalline igneous and metamorphic strata.
To the west and north of the northeast-southwest-trending Glenn Creek Fault Zone lie structurally higher sedimentary units that are everywhere thermally overmature with respect to oil and gas generation.
The eastern boundary is defined by the United States-Canadian border.
The Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks of the Kandik Basin region exhibit a thermal maturity anomaly: vitrinite reflectance (Ro), illite crystallinity, and isotopic data indicate that the younger, structurally higher strata are thermally more mature than the older strata exposed southeast of the Glenn Creek Fault.
The boundary between rocks of low thermal maturity (Ro of 0.9.6 percent) and rocks that have been highly thermally altered (Ro of 1.6.0 percent) does not correspond precisely to the trace of the Glenn Creek Fault but, rather, lies southeast of and parallel to the fault.
Like the Mesozoic rocks, Paleozoic rocks lying west of the fault are generally overmature to supermature.
The nonmarine clastic sequence unconformably overlying Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks on both sides of the Glenn Creek Fault generally is undermature.
The average vitrinite reflectance of the Paleozoic rocks lying southeast of the Glenn Creek Fault in the Kandik area (Ro.8 percent) suggests an average maximum burial temperature of about 125C.
Because of the abundance of potential source and reservoir rocks, the Kandik Basin region has been of interest to petroleum geologists for many years (Brabb and Churkin, 1969).
Upper Precambrian through upper Paleozoic continental-margin strata are unconformably overlain by an organic-rich Triassic-Jurassic horizon.
Interest in the petroleum potential of this area was stimulated in 1970 by the spudding of the Doyon Number 1 well in Mesozoic strata about 25 mi west of the Glenn Creek fault (see fig 1).
Thermal-maturity data indicate that the lack of hydrocarbons is hardly surprising; these rocks are thermally supermature and the Glenn Creek Fault was not penetrated, precluding the possibility of a major overthrust play between rocks east and west of the fault.
Because of their thermal maturity and together with the apparent lack of porosity in any of the potential reservoir rocks, the area west of the Glenn Creek Fault does not appear to be hydrocarbon prospective.
The abundant thermally mature organic-rich shales in the Precambrian, Paleozoic, and Mesozoic section of the region southeast of the fault, however, could generate hydrocarbons.
The principal structure within Play 204 in the east part of the Kandik Basin is the southwest-plunging Michigan Creek Anticlinorium.
Strata younger than Precambrian have been variously stripped off the axis of this anticlinorium; thus, fundamentally compromising the reservoir integrity of this structure, especially for the units lying above the organically very rich Triassic Glenn Shale.
Lapping on this structure with angular discordance is a sequence of Upper Cretaceous to lower Tertiary nonmarine strata that have themselves been folded into broad folds.
These strata make up the principal components of the Play 205.
Several formations within the upper Precambrian through Middle Mesozoic section contain potential source rocks.
None, however, are richer than the Triassic Glenn Shale, which is equivalent to the petroliferous Shublik Shale of the North Slope.
The Glenn Shale locally contains more than 10 percent organic carbon.
Thus, this organic shale, in combination with older black shales, indicates that the play is not limited as a consequence of the source rock.
The Kandik Basin is characterized principally by one major anticlinorium, the socalled Michigan Creek Anticline.
Though highly dismembered, the overall integrity of the southwest anticlinorium is evinced by the map patterns of Precambrian rocks in the core and the younger strata cropping out along the northern and southern flanks.
Although this play contains a world-class source rock in the Glenn Shale, there are no obvious means to charge and preserve reservoirs sourced from this organic-rich shale.
The risk associated with both reservoir and trap integrity is so large that we have eliminated this play from further consideration.
The strata of this play are represented by a heterogeneous mixture of conglomerate, sandstone, mudstone, and locally thin horizons of coal.
The thicknesses of individual layers are highly varied along the strike, with numerous lateral pinch-outs.
Because these are erosional remnants, the total sedimentary package is not preserved.
Existing thicknesses are difficult to measure owing to the lack of marker horizons and overall poor exposures; nonetheless, it's probable that the aggregate thickness is at least 6,500 ft.
Based on the heterogeneity of the strata, the fluvial depositional style, and the occurrence of numerous folds, reservoirs would be characterized by numerous stratigraphic traps and a host of small structural possibilities.
Although some coal has been found in association with these nonmarine strata, the potential of these rock is limited to biogenic methane.
These strata, however, lie above the organic-rich Triassic-Jurassic Glenn Shale as well as other potential source rocks of Paleozoic and late Precambrian age.
The nonmarine strata are largely thermally immature, whereas the underlying potential source rocks that crop out on the surface remain today within the thermal zone of oil generation.
Thus, from the point of view of maturation and charge, the source-rock situation of this play is excellent.
Because of extensive localized folding, numerous and varied small structural and stratigraphic traps are likely in this play.
Owing to the porous nature of the nonmarine package of strata, the absence of any significant oil seeps, and the abundance of prolific petroleum source rocks that remain in the oil-generating window, it seems highly likely that oil and gas accumulations reside within this play.
The occurrence of numerous small folds and the extreme variability of strata along their strike also make it likely that any pools of petroleum will be numerous and small.
There are no unconventional plays described in this province report.
