The Central Alaska Mesozoic Gas Play is in the thick sequences of socalled "flysch" deposits that cover large areas of central and western Alaska, most notably in the Yukon-Koyukuk, Kuskokwim, and Bethel Basins.
Reportedly, these deposits consist mainly of deep-marine turbidite sandstones and shales but also include shallow-marine, alluvial fan, and coal-bearing deltaic and fluvial facies.
In places, the thickness of these deposits may be greater than about 40,000 ft (Decker, 1984).
The composition of the sediments varies from place to place and indicates derivation from varied local sources (Nilsen, 1989).
Potential reservoir rocks are scarce (Patton, 1971).
The turbidite sandstones contain abundant rock fragments of volcanic and metamorphic origin, and porosity is generally occluded by close packing of deformed ductile grains, clayey matrix, and authigenic phases including calcite, quartz, and laumontite.
Lyle and others (1982) examined 44 outcrop samples from the Kuskokwim Group and undifferentiated Cretaceous strata and found no visual porosity.
Laboratory measurements on the same samples indicate low porosity (0.2-7.4 percent, with a mean of 2.8 percent) and virtually no permeability.
Cross-bedded fluvial and shallow marine sandstones reportedly occur in places and contain fewer volcanic grains and more metamorphic and polycrystalline quartz; some of these sandstones reportedly have potential as reservoirs (Hite and Nakayama, 1980).
Fractured reservoirs are possible in sandstones, mudstones, and volcanic rocks, but the sizes and characteristics of such reservoirs in the Central Alaska Province are unknown.
No potential reservoirs were found in Cretaceous rocks in either of the two wells drilled in this play (see discussion below).
Basin area (T.N. Smith, Alaska Division of Oil and Gas, written commun., 1994) show generally low values of TOC (range 0.61-1.59 percent, with a mean of 0.92 percent).
Even lower values of TOC (0.07-1.05 percent with a mean of 0.37 percent) were reported by Lyle and others (1982) for 45 outcrop samples from the Kuskokwim Group and other Cretaceous rocks in southwestern Alaska.
Visual and geochemical analyses from outcrops and wells indicate that kerogens in the Cretaceous rocks are gas prone and dominated by herbaceous, woody, and coaly material.
Available data indicate that the thermal maturity of strata in the Mesozoic basins is variable but generally high, in most places mature to overmature with respect to the zone of oil generation (Johnsson and others, 1993).
Broadly speaking, wide-ranging but generally high levels of thermal maturity may have resulted from deep burial (probably during the Late Cretaceous) followed by differential uplift, or alternatively from locally high-heat flow near igneous intrusions that accompanied Late Cretaceous and early Tertiary regional magmatism.
Most of the thermogenic gas generated during these episodes probably escaped to the atmosphere during subsequent structural deformation, uplift, and erosion.
The remaining ability of the Mesozoic shales to generate hydrocarbons is uncertain but probably low and poses a serious exploration risk.
No confirmed shows or surface seeps of oil or gas have been reported from this play.
Large tracts of Mesozoic strata in western Alaska are intensely folded and faulted, with ubiquitous faults and abundant steeply dipping and overturned beds.
This intense deformation implies small trap size, as well as a high likelihood of breaching and escape of accumulated hydrocarbons to the surface.
However, parts of the Yukon-Koyukuk and Kuskokwim Basins evidently have broad, open folds that may provide trapping possibilities (Patton, 1971).
In the Bethel Basin, Cretaceous strata in the Pan American Petroleum Corporation Napatuk Creek Unit Number 1 well exhibit gentle dips and apparently are only mildly deformed (S.E. Box, U.S. Geological Survey, Spokane, WA, oral commun., 1993).
Published reports on both the Yukon-Koyukuk and Kuskokwim Basins mention lateral changes from deep-marine turbidites to deltaic and shallow-marine facies (Patton, 1971; Nilsen, 1989; Box and Elder, 1992); these changes imply opportunities for stratigraphic traps, if structural disruption is not too severe.
The petroleum potential of the Mesozoic basins appears bleak, but cannot yet be completely written off.
Good reservoirs appear to be scarce; and potential source rocks appear to be organically lean and generally of high thermal maturity.
Large parts of the play are strongly folded and faulted, implying small trap size and a high likelihood that hydrocarbons have been lost.
The sparse available information, taken at face value, suggests a low probability (less than 10 percent) of the occurrence of an undiscovered accumulation larger than 1 MMBO or 6 BCFG.
This highly speculative play includes hypothetical accumulations of oil and gas in unmetamorphosed Paleozoic rocks in the Holitna Basin of southwestern Alaska.
Potential reservoirs within the Paleozoic carbonate section include dolostones, lime grainstones, and reef limestones, some of which reportedly have good intergranular porosity.
Some of the dolostones exhibit as much as 10 percent vuggy porosity (Smith and others, 1984, 1985).
In places, the Paleozoic shales contain allochthonous carbonate debris flows that could serve as reservoirs or as conduits for migration of oil into shallow-water carbonate facies.
Potential source rocks include Ordovician, Silurian, and Lower Devonian graptolitic shales and platy limestones that may be 6,000 ft thick.
Little is known about the organic geochemistry of these rocks.
Unpublished values of TOC from outcrop samples reportedly are mostly less than 0.5 percent, although some range as high as 3.5 percent.
These rocks may be potential sources of oil, by analogy with graptolitic shales that occur elsewhere in North America, North Africa, and the Middle East that generally contain type II, or oil-prone, kerogen (Klemme and Ulmishek, 1991).
A limited number of visual kerogen analyses and conodont alteration indices, all from outcrop samples in the Holitna area, suggest a range from mature to overmature with respect to the thermal zone of oil generation.
The Paleozoic rocks may have reached their present level of thermal maturity during Late Cretaceous and early Tertiary regional magmatism and igneous intrusion.
Any petroleum generated at that time probably was lost during subsequent episodes of folding, faulting, and uplift.
The remaining ability of the Paleozoic shales to generate oil is uncertain but probably low and poses a serious exploration risk.
The largest and most likely potential traps probably are anticlines, but stratigraphic traps also may occur.
A potential regional seal within the Paleozoic rocks is a widespread and thick argillite unit of unknown but post-early Middle Devonian and preLate Pennsylvanian age.
The petroleum potential of Paleozoic rocks in the Holitna Basin is uncertain and risky.
Good potential reservoirs reportedly are present, but virtually nothing is known about potential reservoir volumes or trap sizes.
Source-rock and thermal-maturity data are sparse, but suggest that oil-prone Paleozoic shales exposed at the surface are mature to overmature with respect to the oil-generation window.
There is no direct evidence that oil was ever generated from these rocks.
The timing of oil-generation in this area, if it occurred at all, is unknown and critical to resource evaluation.
If generation occurred during the Late Cretaceous and (or) early Tertiary, which seems likely, much or all of the petroleum resource was probably lost or destroyed during subsequent deformation, uplift, and exposure to the surface.
If oil generation and migration occurred later in the Tertiary (as it did in the Hemlock-Tyonek Play of the Cook Inlet Province), there may be significant accumulations of Paleozoic-sourced oil in overlying Tertiary nonmarine strata.
In western Alaska, unmetamorphosed Paleozoic and Triassic rocks crop out locally on the western Seward Peninsula and on St. Lawrence Island.
Sparse organic geochemical data from these rocks show values of TOC as high as 2.1 percent, gas-prone kerogens, and thermal alteration index values that are immature to mature with respect to the oil-generation window (Fisher, 1982).
The petroleum resource potential of these areas is unknown but probably very low, considering their limited lateral extent.
