Reservoir rocks in the Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System include the Lewis Shale itself, and the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone that interfinger with the Lewis (figures 2B and 2C).
The Lewis Shale is predominantly sandy siltstone and silty mudstone with minor thin sandstones and organic-rich shales all deposited in a marine setting, as indicated by the fine-grained lithology, dark-gray to black color, organic content, sedimentary structures, and inclusion of marine organisms such as ammonite fossils and numerous marine trace fossils.
These fine-grained rocks were deposited as offshore marine strata in the deeper parts of the depositional basin.
The Lewis thin-bedded fine-grained sandstones and siltstones are distal facies of, interfinger with, and grade into sandstones and siltstones of more proximal marginal-marine deposits of the Cliff House Sandstone, including the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues.
These sandstones and siltstones were derived from clastic systems with a source area located southwest of the San Juan Basin.
The Cliff House Sandstone forms a series of stacked shoreline deposits that grade basinward to the northeast into finer-grained offshore deposits (Fassett, 1977, 1983; Molenaar, 1977; Molenaar and others, 2002).
The shoreface deposits are identified by an array of features including the stacking pattern of parasequences recognized on well logs, sedimentary structures observed in outcrop and in core, facies associations on outcrop, and stacked coarsening-upward parasequence patterns on well logs (Palmer and Scott, 1984; Beaumont and Hoffman, 1992).
The depositional strike of the shoreface sandstones is NW.–SE., generally parallel to the structure contours in the Lewis Shale.
The shoreface strata grade distally into thinbedded, fine-grained sandstones and siltstones that interfinger with the marine shale and mudstones of the Lewis.
These distal thin-bedded clastics were probably deposited by longshore currents and as sediment gravity flows and turbidites.
The Lewis Shale is predominantly sandy siltstone and silty mudstone, with thin beds of silty sandstone and organiccarbon-rich shale.
It has porosity ranging from 2 to 8 percent, with matrix permeability averaging about 0.01 md (millidarcies).
Mavor and others (2003) report porosity ranging from 2.9 to 5.44 percent and gas permeability from 0.2 to 215 md.
Water saturation ranges from 20 to 100 percent, averaging about 70 percent (Dube and others, 2000).
The continuous gas accumulation extends from the Lewis Shale into the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues.
These units appear to produce from typical “tight” gas sandstones having low porosity and permeability.
Sandstones have porosity of 8 to 14 percent, permeabilities of 0.15 to 0.3 md, and water saturation of about 30 to 45 percent (Hoppe, 1978a,b,c,d,e).
Most of the wells that produce gas are underpressured at about 0.22 psi/ft (Dube and others, 2000).
Gas production from the main body of the Lewis Shale is reported to be due to the development of natural or artificially induced fractures in thin-bedded clastic units that are cemented and brittle compared to the adjoining shales and mudstones (Jennings and others, 1997; Frantz and others, 1999).
Sandstones and siltstones in the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues are reservoirs that produce gas as typical “tight” gas sandstones, whereas intervals of interbedded shale, mudstone, siltstone, and sandstone in the Lewis Shale require natural fractures or fracture stimulation to produce gas (Jennings and others, 1997a).
The self-sourced and self-sealing gas accumulation is underpressured at present at about 0.22 psi/ft.
The underpressured reservoirs may indicate that gas has migrated up-dip into the water-saturated zone on the southwest margin of the basin.
Adsorption isotherms generated for the quantification of the amount of adsorbed gas-in-place on organic matter in the Lewis Shale (Dubiel and others, 2000) indicate that with reservoirs underpressured at about 0.22 psi/ft, the pressure can not be reduced sufficiently in the present production wells to release the adsorbed gas.
The Lewis Shale TPS is thought to be self-sourced regarding hydrocarbon generation.
The fine-grain size and low permeability of Lewis shales and mudstones likely resulted in a thick stratigraphic section of rocks that is essentially self-sealing with regard to hydrocarbon migration.
The finegrained mudrocks and shales of the Lewis Shale interfinger on a small scale with the interbedded and fractured fine-grained sandstones and siltstones.
Many of these beds can be traced to the southwest where they grade into distal sandstones and siltstones of the basal Cliff House Sandstone, La Ventana Tongue, or Chacra Tongue.
The back-stepping nature of the parasequence sets that form the basal Cliff House Sandstone, La Ventana, and Chacra Tongues resulted in shoreface parasequences and parasequence sets that are overlain by successively finer-grained rocks, allowing for trapping of gas in the shoreface and distal clastic strata by the shales and mudstones, which also form the seals or serve as impediments to gas migration.
In the Lewis Shale and the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues, the gas-producing intervals are within either the sandy shoreface parasequences or the correlative sandy or silty distal extensions of those parasequences that extend into the Lewis Shale.
The producing intervals are in the sandy and silty strata in the Lewis presumably because they are more cemented, brittle, and therefore more susceptible to either natural or artificially induced fractures that produce gas.
In addition, the sandy and silty upper parts of the parasequences commonly are overlain by organic-carbon-rich shale to mudstone that are associated with marine flooding surfaces.
Thus the reservoir strata are immediately overlain and underlain by likely hydrocarbon-rich source rocks that also served as seals or impediments to gas migration.
These facies relations indicate that the Lewis Shale itself is the primary intraformational seal for the continuous gas accumulation in siltstones and sandstones in the Lewis Shale TPS.
The facies relations indicate that the trap and seal thus formed concomitantly with deposition of the strata.
Presumably gas is trapped by a process that is diffusion dependent, whereby gas cannot effectively migrate through the fine-grained mudrocks and/or is trapped in the central part of the basin by infiltration and pore-space saturation by meteoric or migrating formation waters around the basin margins.
Masters (1979) felt that the gas was in part trapped by the up-dip water in rocks at the margins of the San Juan Basin, a mechanism proposed for other basin-centered gas accumulations in Rocky Mountain basins (Brown and others, 1986).
Significant gas migration through and within the Lewis Shale TPS is dependent upon lateral continuity or juxtaposition of porous and permeabsle, thin clastic units and/or a natural fracture network.
Gas production is enhanced by intercepting natural fractures in the well bore or by inducing fractures through artificial stimulation (Frantz and others, 1999).
The geologic events chart (figure 5) summarizes the important elements and timing of processes that contributed to generation and accumulation of hydrocarbons in the Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System.
Deposition of the Lewis Shale and laterally equivalent La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone during the Campanian Stage of the Upper Cretaceous formed the source rocks, reservoir rocks, and seals for the hydrocarbons.
The overburden rocks required to bury and to bring the Lewis Shale marine source rocks to thermal maturity include the Upper Cretaceous Pictured Cliffs Sandstone, Kirtland Shale, and Fruitland Formation, the Upper Cretaceous to Paleocene Ojo Alamo Sandstone and Animas Formation, and the Paleocene Nacimiento Formation.
Deposition of the Eocene San Jose Formation and Oligocene to Miocene volcanic rocks further buried the Lewis Shale to a maximum depth of about 9,000 ft by the middle Miocene.
Deposition of Paleocene to Miocene rocks was concommitant with structural downwarping of the San Juan Basin as part of the Laramide orogeny.
Regional uplift of the San Juan Basin began about 13 million years ago resulting in erosion that exposed rocks as old as Cretaceous around the margins of the basin.
Based on the burial history curves (figures 4A–C), hydrocarbon generation began in the Eocene.
Based on the distribution of producing gas wells, dry holes, water production, and the distribution of favorable reservoir - and source - rock facies, one assessment unit was defined, mapped and assessed for the Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System — the Lewis Continuous Gas Assessment Unit.
The methodology employed for assessment of continuous gas accumulations is described by Schmoker (1996).
