Thermal maturation contours in the Lewis (figure 3C) are drawn primarily from previous work and analyses on organiccarbon-rich rocks above and below the Lewis Shale (Rice, 1983; Law, 1992).
A stratigraphic cross section (figure 3D) (see chaps. 4 and 6, this CD-ROM; adapted from Fassett, 2000) illustrates the distribution of vitrinite reflectance (Ro) values from the Fruitland and Menefee Formations, which stratigraphically bracket the Lewis Shale in the SJB (figure 3C).
Mavor and others (2003) reports vitrinite reflectance (Ro) from 1.79 to 1.88 percent in the Lewis Shale.
In the structurally deepest part of the SJB, the Lewis has attained a thermal maturity sufficient to generate wet and/or dry gas (figures 3C and 3D).
Recent petrographic work on Lewis cores suggests that some parts of the Lewis Shale may have contained an oil precursor (Parris and others, 2003).
The maturation history of the Lewis Shale can be summarized from burial history curves (figures 4A–C) (Bond, 1984; Law, 1992).
The Lewis Shale and adjacent La Ventana and Chacra Tongues were deposited during the Campanian on the western edge of the Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway (Molenaar, 1977).
Accommodation space generated both by subsidence related to basin development and by relative sealevel fluctuations resulted in the deposition and preservation of Cretaceous sediments (Roberts and Kirschbaum, 1995).
During the Laramide orogeny at the end of the Cretaceous, the San Juan Basin underwent significant relatively rapid structural deformation and subsidence.
Tertiary strata were deposited over the Cretaceous rocks from the Paleocene to the Miocene.
Maximum burial of Campanian strata, including the Lewis Shale source rock, occurred at about the OligoceneMiocene boundary, the critical moment for the Lewis Shale source rock (figure 5).
From the Miocene to the present, there has been uplift and erosion.
The Lewis Shale entered the top of the oil generation window toward the middle of the Eocene, and it entered the gas generation window at about the end of the Oligocene.
Mavor and others (2003) also report a Tmax of 424° to 493° C for the Lewis Shale.
This source rock maturation and burial history suggests that the organic-carbon-rich rocks of the Lewis Shale primarily generated dry gas from the middle Eocene onward.
Recent petrographic studies (Parris and others, 2003; Fishman and others, 2004) suggest evidence for present and past minor liquid hydrocarbons in the Lewis despite very low oil yields from Lewis reservoirs.
The Lewis Shale TPS contains a continuous gas accumulation in the Lewis Shale and the interfingered La Ventana and Chacra Tongues in a deep-basin gas trap (Masters, 1979).
Despite little geochemical evidence to type the gas generated from the Lewis, and the fact that Lewis gas production is comingled with Mesaverde gas production, the gas in the Lewis is thought to be self-sourced, and it has not undergone significant migration, based on sequence stratigraphic analysis in this assessment and previously reported low but consistent TOC values over a stratigraphic thickness of as much as 2,400 ft (Dube and others, 2000).
However, some local migration must have occurred to charge the laterally adjacent shoreface sandstones of the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues and the more distal equivalents of these sandstones and siltstones that extend basinward into the Lewis Shale.
These sandstones and siltstones extend far into the basin where they interfinger with and are in direct contact with Lewis Shale source rock.
Both distally in the basin and proximally in the southwest part of the SJB, gas-producing intervals are immediately adjacent to the third-order marine maximum flooding surfaces that delineate the four informal intervals in the Lewis and to other shale-rich intervals.
The juxtaposition of organic-rich shales at these marine flooding surfaces to potential clastic reservoir facies provides the most likely mechanism and pathway for hydrocarbon migration into the clastic-rich units that are the principal gas reservoirs in the Lewis.
The organic-carbon-rich mudstones deposited along the maximum flooding surfaces and other minor mudstone-rich intervals may also have acted as internal baffles and barriers to significant hydrocarbon migration as a result of their low porosity and permeability.
