The Lewis Shale Total Petroleum System includes all major outcrops and subsurface deposits of the Lewis Shale and laterally equivalent rocks of the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone of the Mesaverde Group (figure 3A).
The Lewis Shale is thought to be the source rock for the Lewis Shale TPS (see following section on Hydrocarbon Source Rocks).
The Lewis Shale and the laterally equivalent La Ventana and Chacra Tongues of the Cliff House Sandstone are the reservoir rocks for a continuous gas accumulation in the Lewis Shale TPS.
The Lewis Shale TPS normally also would include rocks assigned to the basal part of the Cliff House Sandstone (those sandstones of the Cliff House Sandstone that interfinger with the Cliff House transition zone of the Lewis Shale; figures 2B and 2C) because they are genetically related to the Chacra and La Ventana, they similarly interfinger basinward with the Lewis Shale, and they may have been charged with gas generated from the Lewis.
However, for this study the basal Cliff House Sandstone of that interval is included in and assessed as part of the Mancos-Menefee Composite TPS (see chapage 4, this CD-ROM) because the database used for this assessment often included and designated wells producing from sandstones within the basal Cliff House as Mesaverde production.
Thus, those sandstones are assessed as part of the Mancos-Menefee Composite TPS, which includes all the other Mesaverde units.
This separation of basal Cliff House from La Ventana and Chacra production is in part an artifact of pool definitions by the New Mexico Oil Conservation Division (NMOCD).
In 1977, the NMOCD defined a “Chacra line” running northwest to southeast across the SJB.
This line delineates the down-dip limit of production from progradational shoreface sandstones of the La Ventana and Chacra Tongues, known collectively in industry terms as the “Chacra” sandstones or “Chacra producing interval.”
North and east of the “Chacra line,” where the majority of Mesaverde production exists, the lower part of the Lewis Shale up to the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed was originally included in leases of the Mesaverde Group production in the Mesaverde pool definition (Dube and others, 2000).
Since that original definition, the NMDOC revised the upper limit of the Mesaverde pool to include an additional 250 ft of Lewis Shale above the Huerfanito Bentonite Bed.
Currently, completion or recompletion of the Lewis Shale producing interval in what are or were primarily Mesaverde wells is dealt with administratively as a pay-add; that is, the production of gas from the Lewis is commingled with and added to Mesaverde production from the same well, which also simplifies the regulatory approval process.
It also maximizes Lewis economics because the Lewis can be completed with Mesaverde and/or Dakota Group production and does not require a separate well bore or production string.
However, it complicates the assessment of gas produced solely from the Lewis Shale because that gas is co-mingled both as actual gas production and as reported in the IHS database used in this assessment (IHS, 2000a,b).
It was not possible to separate the Cliff House Sandstone (basal Cliff House interval) production from overall Mesaverde production simply by examining the production data as reported for Cliff House or Mesaverde wells in the IHS database (IHS, 2000a,b).
Lewis gas is similarly comingled and produced with Mesaverde gas.
It was possible to distinguish some of the Lewis Shale gas production from Mesaverde production using Estimated Ultimate Recovery (EUR) curves generated from the production database (IHS, 2000a) by isolating EUR curves that showed a significant spike in increased gas production since about 1990.
This is the general onset date for the recent industry trend to establish Lewis gas production from recompletions in preexisting Mesaverde wells.
In addition, all Mesaverde records in the IHS database (IHS, 2000a,b) for the SJB were individually checked, and those well records that reported a perforated interval for the Lewis Shale were used in the assessment of the Lewis TPS.
