It is now widely recognized that the stratigraphy of the northeastern Brooks Range, particularly the location of incompetent shale units that become the site of detachment surfaces, has played an important role in determining the structural style of Brookian deformation (Kelley and Foland, 1987; Wallace and Hanks, 1990; Wallace, 1993; Hanks, 1993; Cole and others, Chapage SM).
Map-scale antiforms such as the Mt. Greenough and Aichilik River antiforms, are interpreted as horses within an extensive duplex composed of relatively rigid units of pre-Mississippian rocks caught between a roof thrust along a regional detachment in the Kayak Shale and a floor thrust at depth in pre-Mississippian rocks.
Similarly, a higher regional detachment surface near the top of the Ellesmerian sequence in the Kingak Shale has facilitated detachment folding or local duplexing of mechanically competent Ellesmerian units, particularly carbonate rocks of the Lisburne Group, between a roof thrust in the Kingak and a floor thrust in the Kayak Shale.
This style of deformation, termed multistoried duplexes by Wallace and others (1997), has resulted in shortening that is expressed in folding and faulting of competent units at multiple structural levels between bounding detachment surfaces in incompetent shale horizons (Wallace and others, 1997).
Where a bounding incompetent shale pinches out stratigraphically, the detachment surface ramps upward (forward or hindward) to a higher incompetent unit.
This has occurred in the Sadlerochit Mountains, where a map-scale antiform is underlain by a horse composed of a structurally continuous sequence of pre-Mississippian rocks and Ellesmerian sequence because of the northward disappearance of the Kayak Shale (Kelley and Foland, 1987; Robinson and others, 1989; Wallace and Hanks, 1990; Wallace, 1993; Cole and others, Chapage SM).
In these areas, the Ellesmerian sequence is deformed with underlying pre-Mississippian rocks in duplexes between detachment surfaces in the Kingak Shale and at depth in pre-Mississippian rocks.
The deformational style present in the Brookian sequence is more complex because these rocks consist of variable proportions of competent sandstone and less competent shale units that undergo abrupt lateral changes of facies.
As a result, deformation in the Brookian is thin skinned and locally displays disharmonic folds and internal thrust faults at outcrop scale.
Observations of seismic data in the eastern 1002 area nonetheless show that thick sequences of the Brookian rocks locally remain intact between discrete discordant structures (e.g., the topset beds of the Jago River Formation in the Sabbath Creek synform).
Shot-hole paleontologic data within areas of incoherent seismic records suggest that imbrication of major stratigraphic units is uncommon and that stratigraphic order is generally preserved between major bounding structures.
This suggests that while the rocks are internally deformed, shortening has not been accommodated by an imbricate style of deformation at map scale.
These observations instead suggest that the seismically incoherent regions probably reflect the presence of internally deformed clinoform deposits.
Individual map-scale folds in the Brookian sequence generally can be traced in seismic data for no more than about 15 km.
Structural culminations, such as the Aichilik high and Jago ridge and depressions such as the Sabbath Creek syncline, are composite structures consisting of multiple folds.
Folds observed in outcrop and seismic data vary from open to asymmetric; near vertical and overturned beds are less common.
These geometries suggest that map-scale deformation in the Brookian is expressed as fault-bend folds or possibly, detachment folds.
As a simplifying assumption for construction of the section, a fault-bend fold style of deformation has been assumed.
This interpretation has the advantage of allowing seismically complex areas of Brookian deposits to be modeled as approximately rigid bodies, at least at map scale.
In summary, the cross section presented in this report interprets Brookian deformational style for the entire stratigraphic succession along the transect to be the result of deformation of a mechanically layered medium.
The structural relief of individual folds and faults is thus controlled by the thickness of competent strata caught between welldefined detachment surfaces in incompetent, shale-rich units.
The detachment surfaces recognized in outcrop and seismic records and along which deformation is modeled in Plate BC1 are shown in Figure BC3.
The depth to basal detachment under the coastal plain is a fundamental parameter that controls the deformational geometry of structures throughout the hindward part of the cross section.
Hanks (1990, 1991, 1993) calculated a depth to the basal detachment at 20,000 ft (~6100 m) based on the amount of structural relief on the Niguanak high visible on the published time seismic records available to her (i.e., Bird and Magoon, 1987, plate 4).
As she noted, the 20,000 ft depth she used in her section is the minimum depth possible for the basal detachment under the coastal plain.
Consequently, the amount of shortening, 100.8 km or 45.8 percent over the length of her section, is the maximum allowed by the gross geometry of seismic basement under the coastal plain.
Thus, the model of Hanks (1990, 1991, 1993) can be regarded as a maximum shortening model.
Disadvantages of the maximum shortening model include (1) requirement of a thick antiformal stack of horses of Ellesmerian sequence rocks at the Aichilik River antiform whose existence cannot be independently confirmed, and (2) numerous horses composed of pre-Mississippian rocks in the Mt. Greenough and Aichilik River antiforms.
The latter point can be analyzed on existing geologic maps because the basal part of the Ellesmerian sequence (lower Kayak Shale, Kekiktuk Conglomerate, and underlying unconformity) may be expected to be preserved along the top surfaces of pre-Mississippian horses as a consequence of the roof thrust being located within the interior of the Kayak Shale.
Examination of the map of Reiser and others (1980) shows few exposures of Kekiktuk and Kayak in the cores of the two antiforms, suggesting that a large number of horses, and hence a large amount of Cenozoic shortening, is unlikely in the pre-Mississippian rocks.
However, most of this area is mapped only in reconnaissance and the Kayak and Kekiktuk are thin units that may be difficult to distinguish from pre-Mississippian rocks without detailed mapping (W.K. Wallace, written comm., 1999; C. Hanks, written comm., 1999), so this conclusion should be considered to be tentative.
The good quality depth-converted seismic records available to this study allowed an empirical approach to be used for determination of the depth to detachment under the coastal plain.
Relevant observations are as follows: (1) the top of undeformed pre-Mississippian basement beneath the foreland of the thrust belt is imaged at the north end of seismic line 84-40, and lies at a depth of about 23,000 to 25,000 ft (~7000-7600 m); (2) the depth to the top of pre-Mississippian rocks in the synformal low beneath the Sabbath Creek syncline along the line of transect is at about 25,000 ft (~7600 m); (3) regional average depth to pre-Mississippian rocks in the eastern part of the 1002 area both east and west of the transect is about 25,000 ft (~7600 m) (Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA1); (4) a prominent band of reflections visible within seismic basement and interpreted by Grow and others (Chapage NA) as a lateral ramp underlying Aurora dome, descends eastward from the top of the pre-Mississippian at a depth of 23,000 ft (~7000) on the west flank of Aurora dome to more than 35,000 ft (10,670 m) beneath the core of the structure (Grow and others, Chapage NA); if a lateral ramp, this structure suggests the basal detachment lies at a depth of 35,000 ft or greater; and (5) westward-dipping reflections in seismic basement on the eastern flank of the Niguanak high are interpreted as the upper part of a lateral ramp that extend to a depth of at least 26,000 ft (7900 m) within pre-Mississippian rocks (Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA4).
Taken together, these observations suggest that the top of undeformed pre-Mississippian rocks lie regionally at a depth of 7 to 7.6 km (23,000-25,000 ft) and that the sub-pre-Mississippian basal detachment is located at a depth of approximately 10.7 km (35,000 ft) under the coastal plain.
Using a depth to the top of pre-Mississippian rocks of 7.2 km (~23,600 ft), a best call from seismic line 84-40 near the north end of the transect, iterative modeling using reflectors beneath the Niguanak high and simple fault-bend fold geometry (see below) suggests that the pre-Mississippian section deformed above the detachment is about 4.1 km (~13,500 ft) thick and that the basal detachment lies at a depth of about 11.3 km (37,000 ft).
By retrodeforming the pre-Mississippian section as described in the section below, the best-fit model suggests that the basal detachment descends over the length of the section to a depth of 15.6 km (~51,000 ft) south of the Bathtub syncline.
The depth to basal detachment calculated in this paper (11.3 km beneath the coastal plain to 15.6 km in the interior of the northeastern Brooks Range, is significantly deeper than that suggested by Hanks (1990, 1993) (6.1 km beneath the coastal plain to 11.5 km beneath Bathtub syncline) for nearly the same line of section.
However, the depth to basal detachment presented here is not as deep as that used by Hanks (1990) for her transect line through the Okpilak batholith about 40 km to the west (10 km beneath the coastal plain descending to 18.5 km beneath the interior of the foldbelt).
Cole and others (Chapage SM) used a depth to detachment in the southwestern part of the 1002 area of 8-9 km and, in the central Brooks Range, Fuis and others (1997) determined that a basal detachment of Cenozoic age descends from a depth of 10 km near the front of the Brooks Range to 30 km in the southern Brooks Range.
Considering that many workers have ascribed the fundamental tectonic cause of Cenozoic deformation in the northeastern Alaska to far-field effects of subduction in southern Alaska (e.g., Grantz and others, 1991; Lane, 1998) and that a detachment at or near the base of crust allows stress to be transmitted from southern to northern Alaska, a deep level of detachment might be expected as the locus of shortening ascends from depths of about 30-35 km under interior Alaska to the coastal plain in the 1002 area in northeastern Alaska (Plate BC1, cross section A).
In the interpretation presented here, the basal detachment steps up northward to the top of the pre-Mississippian unit at a depth of 7.2 km (~23,600 ft) beneath the Aurora dome and continues northward under the Beaufort shelf beyond the northern limit of the section.
