The Hartford Basin in Connecticut and Massachussetts contains approximately 18,000 feet of Upper Triassic and Lower Jurassic sediments and volcanic rocks.
The lower part of the section consists of the red conglomerates, pebbly sandstones, and mudstones of the New Haven Arkose, about 14,000 ft thick.
Three of the overlying Jurassic formations have at least some potential for hydrocarbon generation and production in the basin.
Kotra and others (1988) sampled and studied more than 50 samples of kerogen and phytoclasts from the Shuttle Meadow, East Berlin, and Portland Formations.
They determined that the kerogen is made up of material derived from mixed vascular plants and algae and is of proper maturity to have generated liquid hydrocarbons.
Spiker and others (1988) concluded that the abundance of terrestrially-derived organic matter in samples they studied from the Hartford and Newark Basins favored the generation of natural gas over oil.
The Gettysburg Basin in Maryland and Pennsylvania and the Newark Basin in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York contain about 22,000 to 25,000 feet of Upper Triassic and Lower Jurassic sedimentary strata and basalt flows.
The flows are in the Jurassic part of the section and their intrusion was associated with a relatively brief period of unusually high heat flow in the basins.
The two basins are connected by a more or less deformed "narrow neck" of Triassic conglomerates, sandstones , and red beds.
The Gettysburg Basin to the south contains relatively few gray shale source beds, although Ziegler (1983) reports that the Leib no. 1 Sheppard well ran production casing in 1962 and produced 2.5 BO.
Most of the stratigraphic sequence consists of thousands of feet of red sandstone, shale, conglomerate, and arkose with subsidiary red, green, and gray shale.
In the Newark basin several formations, including the Jurassic Towaco and Feltville Formations and the Triassic Passaic and Locatong Formations, contain gray or black lacustrine beds which have some source rock potential.
According to Katz and others (1988), organic geochemical data indicate that there is only a limited potential for hydrocarbon production in the basin.
The Triassic part of the section generated hydrocarbons early in the history of the basin, but generation apparently ceased when the basin was uplifted and eroded.
The Jurassic part of the section is generally immature with respect to hydrocarbon generation because of relatively shallow depths of burial.
Pratt and others (1988) noted that overmature Triassic strata are overlain by mature and immature Jurassic strata over a narrow stratigraphic interval.
They attributed this telescoping of geothermal maturation zones to a pulse of high heat flow that occurred early in the Jurassic simultaneously with the emplacement of basalt flows on younger strata.
The uneven distribution of source beds and the rapid variation of their thermal maturity levels in short distances, when coupled with relatively low intergranular porosity and permeability of potential sandstone reservoirs, makes exploration for hydrocarbons in these basins speculative at best.
The Culpeper Basin, Virginia contains a thick sequence of Upper Triassic to Lower Jurassic nonmarine sedimentary rocks with an aggregate thickness of about 18,000 feet.
The sequence is divided into seven sedimentary formations that contain two named basalt formations.
Of the former, the Midland Formation and Balls Bluff Siltstone contain dark-gray lacustrine shales that may have some potential as a petroleum or natural gas source rock (Lee and Froelich, 1989).
Smith and Robison (1988) followed Lindholm's (1979) stratigraphy and determined that lacustrine deposits in Lindholm's (1979) Bull Run Formation, an equivalent of the Balls Bluff Formation of Lee and Froelich (1989), are overmature with respect to the liquid hydrocarbon window (mean Ro = 1.69 percent), with some Ro values greater than 2.00 percent and are indicative of the dry gas zone.
In addition, their whole-rock pyrolysis data for the Bull Run Formation indicate that its kerogen is gas-prone type III which has been highly degraded.
In contrast, samples collected by Smith and Robison (1988) at the Midland fish bed of the Midland Formation indicate that these strata are a source rock that has potential for oil generation.
Kerogen types are dominantly type I and II, with lesser amounts of type III.
Black shales within the Waterfall Formation at the top of the Mesozoic section in the Culpeper Basin contain sufficient amounts of organic matter to be source rocks, but are relatively immature with regard to oil generation.
Kerogen is a mixture of types I and II, so that the oil-prone organic matter is at a very early stage of oil generation.
Coal was mined from the Richmond Basin by Huguenot settlers and used locally by 1703.
The coal mines proved to be excessively gassy and as a result many miners were killed by explosions in subsequent years (Wilkes, 1988).
The basin has been extensively drilled both for coal, oil, and gas.
Much of the coal test information that was developed by industry during the 1980's remains proprietary.
Wilkes (1988), however, has documented 22 oil and gas or coal tests that were drilled to depths of 1000 feet or more into Richmond Basin rocks.
Of these, 6 reported shows of oil but nothing was discovered in commercial quantities.
The deepest well, the Cornell Oil Company, Bailey Number 1, was drilled in 1981 and encountered basement at a depth of 7110 ft (Wilkes, 1988).
The most likely source beds for oil in the Richmond basin are the lacustrine gray to black shales within the Upper Triassic Vinita Beds.
The Vinita Beds are about 6000 ft thick and consist of strata that were deposited in fluvial and deltaic environments around the margins of the basin and in lacustrine environments in the basin center (Goodwin and others, 1985).
Robbins and others (1988), from a study of coal beds and pollen and spore colors from rocks in the Richmond Basin and the Deep Run Basin nearby, have documented that thermal maturation ranges from submature to supermature with respect to oil generation.
