The Ellesmerian sequence is exposed along the transect in the Bathtub syncline, the “Wall” synform, and at Leffingwell Ridge (Reiser and others, 1980) (Figure BC2).
It consists, from base to top, of the Mississippian Kekiktuk Conglomerate and Kayak Shale of the Endicott Group, the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian Lisburne Group, the Permian and Triassic Sadlerochit Group, Triassic Shublik Formation, Triassic Karen Creek Sandstone, Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous Kingak Shale, and Hauterivian and Barremian pebble shale unit (Figure BC3).
These strata record a Mississippian transgression that deposited nonmarine and paralic sediments (Kekiktuk Conglomerate) followed by black marine shale (Kayak Shale) and carbonate platform deposits (Lisburne Group).
The Lisburne Group is disconformably overlain by mainly transgressive shelf deposits (Sadlerochit Group, Shublik Formation, and Karen Creek Sandstone).
The overlying Kingak Shale consists of what are interpreted to be fine-grained rift-shoulder deposits that were shed southward from the rift zone that eventually led to the development of the Canada basin (Hubbard and others, 1987).
The pebble shale unit is a thin unit of condensed shale that marks the end of Ellesmerian deposition (Bird and Molenaar, 1987).
The Ellesmerian sequence is about 1700 m thick at Bathtub syncline and the “Wall” synform but decreases to about 1300 m at Leffingwell Ridge (Table BC1).
On Plate BC1, the Ellesmerian sequence is subdivided into three units: (1) a lower part consisting of the Endicott and Lisburne Groups, (2) a middle part consisting of the Sadlerochit Group, Shublik Formation, and Karen Creek Sandstone, and (3) an upper part that consists of the Kingak Shale and pebble shale unit (Figure BC3).
The Kingak Shale is a highly deformed unit, whose stratigraphic thickness is difficult to estimate.
Regionally, it thins southward from about 400 m north of Leffingwell Ridge to about 150 m at Bathtub syncline, where it comprises the lower part of the Kongakut Formation of Detterman and others (1975) (Moore and others, 1994) (Table BC1).
In this area, the Kingak is too thin to be shown and is included with the middle part of the Ellesmerian sequence on Plate BC1).
Under the coastal plain, the Ellesmerian sequence can be recognized in seismic records on the Okerokovik monocline (Figure BC2).
In this area, the Lisburne Group is interpreted to be expressed as a seismically transparent zone bounded above and below by high amplitude anomalies representing the Endicott Group and Sadlerochit Group (Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA7).
At the longitude of the transect, the Ellesmerian sequence is about 1200 m thick (Plate BC1; Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figure NA5).
North of the Sabbath Creek syncline, it is uncertain whether the Ellesmerian sequence is present in the subsurface (Grow and others, Chapage NA).
Seismic data on the south flank of the Niguanak high display a transparent zone that apparently thins northward and nearly pinches out over the shallowest part of the high at a depth of about 3,050 m (10,000 ft) (Plate BC1).
This transparent zone is here interpreted to be carbonate rocks of the Lisburne Groupage High amplitude anomalies are present above the transparent zone but are mostly absent below it in this area.
The disappearance of the lower high-amplitude anomaly can be attributed to northward depositional onlap of the Ellesmerian sequence onto pre-Mississippian rocks so that the Lisburne Group was deposited directly on pre-Mississippian rocks beyond depositional pinch-out of the Endicott Groupage Seismic velocities are approximately the same in pre-Mississippian rocks and the carbonate rocks of the Lisburne Group (Grow and others, Chapage NA), so a high amplitude anomaly would not be expected to be found in seismic data if this is the case.
Northward onlap of the Ellesmerian sequence onto pre-Mississippian rocks has long been recognized in the central North Slope (e.g., Bird, 1988; Chapage GG, Figure GG5), the Sadlerochit Mountains (Bird and Molenaar, 1987), and is likely present in the subsurface in the 1002 area west of the Niguanak high (Grow and others, Chapage NA, Figures NA5, NA8, NA9).
North of the Niguanak high, there is little evidence that the lower and middle parts of the Ellesmerian sequence are present.
Rocks of the upper part of the Ellesmerian sequence, the Kingak Shale and pebble shale unit, are exposed in outcrop above the crestal region of the Niguanak high (Bird, Chapage GG).
Seismic data and geologic considerations show that these rocks are allochthonous and would be restored southward in most models (Molenaar and others, 1987; Potter and others, Chapage BD).
A key question for the construction of Plate BC1 is whether the Lower Cretaceous unconformity (LCU), which lies in the uppermost part of the Ellesmerian sequence beneath the pebble shale unit, extends eastward into the line of transect.
This unconformity, interpreted as the “breakup” unconformity associated with opening of the Canada basin in the Hauterivian by Grantz and May (1983), was developed along the nascent margin of the Canada basin.
The amount of section removed by the unconformity is variable.
In the western part of the 1002 area, the entire Ellesmerian sequence and an unknown amount of pre-Mississippian rocks were removed beneath the LCU (Cole and others, Chapage SM), whereas in the Kuparuk River oil field, about 50 km west of ANWR (Figure BC1), little or no section is missing by erosion (Carman and Hardwick, 1983).
Regionally, the amount of section removed beneath the LCU diminishes southward from a maximum in the Beaufort Sea coastal region, and the unconformity merges with conformable strata at about the southern limit of the coastal plain in the central and western North Slope (Bird, 1985; Bird, Chapage GG, Figure GG6).
Information bearing on the existence of the LCU along the line of transect is sparse.
The large amount of section removed in the northwestern part of the 1002 area, coupled with the position of the northern end of the transect at or near the apex of the rifted margin of the Canada basin (indicated by reversal of dip at the top of pre-Mississippian rocks in the subsurface offshore, Grantz and others, 1990, Plate 9, Profile 9C), suggest that erosion on the LCU was likely.
However, no erosion is evident in the northernmost exposures of the Ellesmerian sequence at Leffingwell Ridge and where Ellesmerian strata are best imaged on seismic lines in the south-central part of the 1002 area (Grow and others, Chapage NA).
The presence of the LCU, at best, is equivocal along seismic lines on this transect (Plate BC1).
Little or no erosion over this interval may be present in the Aurora well (M.B. Mickey, written comm. to M. Keller, 1997) (Nelson and others, Chapage WL, Plate WL8).
For the purpose of construction of the cross section discussed in this paper, I suggest that the LCU has truncated the upper part of the Ellesmerian sequence from a position beneath the Sabbath Creek syncline northward to near the Beaufort Sea.
This interpretation is based on two observations:  (1) the reflective, upper part of the Ellesmerian sequence (Sadlerochit Group and higher) as interpreted above the southern flank of the Niguanak high on seismic line 85-50 is much thinner than where seen on seismic lines south of the Sabbath Creek syncline, and (2) fossils from the Kingak exposures above the Niguanak high suggest the Kingak is no younger than Middle Jurassic at that location (Detterman and others, 1975; Reiser and others, 1980).
The latter evidence may indicate that post-Jurassic strata of the Kingak were removed beneath the LCU at least as far south as the position at which the exposures of the Kingak above the Niguanak high were deposited prior to their northward displacement on thrust faults.
Fine-grained clastic rocks of Jurassic and Neocomian age are present in the lower 730 m of the Aurora well (M.B. Mickey, written comm. to M. Keller, 1997) (Nelson and others, Chapage WL, Plate WL8).
If the remainder of the sedimentary section below the well to the top of seismic basement consists of similar rocks, the unit may be as thick as 2100 m.
The presence of Jurassic and Neocomian strata in the Aurora well may indicate that at least the upper part (i.e., the Kingak Shale and pebble shale unit) of the Ellesmerian sequence extends northward beyond the 1002 area into the area of the Beaufort shelf.
As explained by Bird (Chapage GG), however, the Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous strata in the Aurora well instead may represent part of an extensional basin that may be analogous to the failed-rift deposits of the Dinkum graben (Grantz and others,1975; 1990).
An equivalent of the gamma-ray shale (GRZ), a key marker at the top of the Ellesmerian sequence in ANWR (Bird and Molenaar, 1987) is not present in the well.
This observation, coupled with the possibly large thickness and apparent westward disappearance of these deposits on seismic records (Grow and others, Chapage NA; Bird, written comm., 1998) suggest that Jurassic and Neocomian deposits of the Aurora well may represent fill of an distinct basin that may be related to the Dinkum graben.
To recognize this possibility in this paper, the Jurassic and Neocomian deposits of the Beaufort shelf are shown as the Beaufortian sequence on Plate BC1.
