The Taylorsville Basin, which lies almost entirely buried beneath the Atlantic Coastal Plain, has attracted considerable interest by industry during the past several years.
The exposed part of the basin has been mapped and described in detail by Weems (1980, 1981, 1986) and Goodwin and others (1985).
The deeper parts of the basin were explored by three oil and gas tests and by six diamond drill holes cored by Texaco, Inc. Texaco's first oil and gas test, in 1989, was drilled to basement at a depth of 10,135 ft.
Data from all but the last oil and gas test, as well as an interpretation of a regional vibroseis line across the basin, are presented by Milici and others (1991).
Three of the core holes as well as the Texaco Wilkens et ux no. 1 oil and gas test exhibited shows of hydrocarbons, although not in commercial quantities.
Palynomorphs from the exposed part of the basin have yielded TAI colors that indicate these strata are within the thermal zone of oil generation (see Milici and others, 1991 for a summary).﻿
Proprietary data from the Wilkins well indicates that there are about 200 feet of gray shale in the lower half of the well that are potentially suitable for source beds.
The Dan River–Danville Basin is a relatively narrow, elongate basin that extends for a distance of about 110 mi from within the south-central Virginia Piedmont into adjacent North Carolina.
In general, the basin is not highly regarded as a possible source for oil and gas.
Potential source beds are overmature with respect to oil generation and potential reservoir sandstones are poorly sorted and have low porosity and permeability (Olsen and others, 1991).
This conclusion is supported by analyses of five coal samples presented by Robbins and others (1988), which range in rank from semianthracite to anthracite.
Stratigraphic data presented by Myertons (1963), and geochemical data presented by Reid and Hoffman (in preparation), however, indicate that there may be some potential for natural gas production from the basin.
The potential source bed is the Cow Branch Formation, which consists of about 9500 ft of black to dark-gray lacustrine claystone, shale, siltstone, and some sandstone.
Twelve analyses, averaging TOC 3.42 percent, from one well in the Cow Branch Formation exceed minimum values required for hydrocarbon generation and expulsion (Reid and Hoffman, in preparation).
Limited hydrogen/carbon and oxygen/carbon data indicate that kerogen in the Dan River Basin is type III, so that the source rocks would be gas prone; vitrinite reflection data indicate that thermal maturation ranges from about the lower limit of the thermal zone of oil generation into the upper limits of the zone of dry gas generation.
It can be concluded that, if hydrocarbons are found in commercial quantities, they most likely would be gas and would be produced from fracture-enhanced reservoirs.
The Cumnock Formation in the Deep River Basin is an excellent source for hydrocarbons.
It is a low grade oil shale about 700 to 800 ft thick and in places contains one or two coal beds (Reinemund, 1955; Reid and Hoffman, in preparation).
TOC of the Sanford Formation averages 5.17 percent, organic matter is generally type III, and available vitrinite reflectance data indicate a range of hydrocarbon generation potential from oil and peak wet-gas generation to dry gas generation (Reid and Hoffman, in preparation).
TAI indices from three samples of palynomorphs in the Deep River Basin and the rank of 11 samples of coal indicate that thermal maturation levels are mature with respect to oil generation (Robbins and others, 1988).
As in the Dan River–Danville Basin, porosities in the Deep River Basin are very low and average about 3.5 percent.
Production of hydrocarbons from the Deep River Basin, thus, most likely would be natural gas from fractured reservoirs.
There are no unconventional plays described in this province report.
However, unconventional plays listed in the surrounding provinces may include parts of this province.
Individual unconventional plays are usually discussed under the province in which the play is principally located.
